PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Miner Rio Tinto has started construction on the first commercial-scale prototype cells of ELYSIS’ inert anode technology, at its Alma smelter in Quebec. ELYSIS is a joint venture led by Rio and aluminium major Alcoa, that is working to commercialise a new technology to make aluminum that eliminates all direct greenhouse gases from the traditional smelting process and instead produces oxygen. As part of its technology development and scale-up, ELYSIS will install industrial inert anode prototype cells at the end of an existing potline at the Alma smelter to demonstrate the technology’s effectiveness at a commercial scale in an industrial operating environment. The inert anode prototype cells will operate on a commercial scale typical for large modern aluminium smelters, using an electrical current of 450 kiloamperes. “Today marks a real step towards the future of the aluminium industry, by progressing this breakthrough technology to cut carbon emissions. Rio is committed to supporting its ongoing development here in Quebec where we already use clean hydropower to deliver some of the world’s lowest carbon aluminium,” Rio aluminium MD for its Atlantic Operations Samir Cairae said. “Combining this technology with renewable hydropower holds the promise of zero carbon aluminium smelting.” Canada’s Minister of Innovation, Science and Industry, Francois-Philippe Champagne, joined representatives from ELYSIS, Rio Tinto and Alcoa to mark the start of construction and announce a further C$20-million financial contribution from the government of Canada to support the project. The federal government's financial support will enable the creation of a unique commercial size inert anode technology showroom for future customers and will help develop the supply chain by involving local and regional equipment manufacturers and suppliers in the project. “The investment announced today will help Canada’s world-class aluminum producers become leading players in the low-carbon economy and support key local players throughout the supply chain. We are proud to support ELYSIS in developing the world’s first carbon-free aluminium that will help Canada achieve its net-zero objective by 2050. This investment will foster innovation, create good jobs here in Quebec and help support the future competitiveness of Canada’s aluminium industry,” the Minister said. ELYSIS is working to complete the technology demonstration by 2024 followed by the commercialization activities.