Two specialised expandable graphite products sold by graphite and graphene producer Tirupati Graphite are gaining “significant” traction as the company undertakes development of speciality graphite products for use in high-tech applications like lithium-ion batteries, fire retardants, thermal management and composites. The products, CarboFlameX and GRafEN 45545, were developed at Tirupati’s Patalganga project, in India – which is part of Tirupati Speciality Graphite (TSG), with whom Tirupati has a binding acquisition agreement subject to regulatory approvals. CarboFlameX is an expandable graphite-based halogen-free flame retardant that can be used in various polymers and provides insulation to increase energy efficiency; while GrafEN 45545 is an expandable graphite-based flame retardant composite (FRC), which is compliant with one of the most stringent flame retardancy and toxicity standards, Tirupati states. After receiving the recognised international standard Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals certification in February, Tirupati has significantly increased its reach and sales of its range of expandable graphite products into the European Union/European Economic Area (EU/EEA) and globally, as users look to source products outside of China. As such, the company is now working with multiple consumers, supplying niche, customised products for applications in the flame retardants, sealings and thermal management markets. Given its changing policies in flame retardancy requirements, new flame retarding products are gaining particular interest from customers in the UK, where further marketing efforts by Tirupati are under way. As well as supplying regular customers, other potential customers of Tirupati are evaluating samples as the first stage of tests and first stage commercial trial orders have been secured with several bulk consumers. Tirupati Graphite CEO Shishir Poddar says the company’s first commercial trial orders for its trademarked flame retardant products is in line with the trend for businesses and end-users to increasingly support green technology engineering and research that reinforce global resilience and sustainability. UPSCALING DEVELOPMENT Following its decision to fast-track the scaled-up development of its 15 000 t/y speciality graphite project, Tirupati is setting up a dedicated product development facility using its expandable graphite and other speciality graphite materials. To kick-start this process, TSG has been allotted an additional one acre plot in Patalganga by the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation, which was earlier planned for expanding the Patalganga facilities. This complements the development of markets for Tirupati’s integrated, multi-product 15 000 t/y downstream specialty graphite project, which is expected to commence by the first half of 2022.
 
Further, Tirupati is continuing ongoing engagement with lithium-ion battery and electric vehicle sector players in Europe and Asia, as well as advancing plans to expand into North America for upcoming large-scale spherical graphite production.