PERTH (miningweekly.com) – ASX-listed FYI Resources has been awarded Major Project status for its A$269-million High Purity Alumina (HPA) project, in Kwinana, by the Australian government. “We are delighted to receive the formal recognition from the Australian federal government for our innovative and fully integrated HPA project,” said FYI MD Roland Hill on Tuesday. “The Major Project status demonstrates the significance of our project. The importance of the status should also assist in providing confidence for international and environmental, social and governance investors by providing increased assurance in our development pathway.” The HPA project includes the development and operation of a mine and processing plant to produce high-purity alumina for exports. A recently updated definitive feasibility study found that the project could produce some 10 000 t/y of HPA, up from the 8 000 t/y considered in the original study, over a project life of 25 years, generating sales revenue of A$6.1-billion. HPA has been identified in the Resources Technology and Critical Minerals Processing National Manufacturing Priority Road Map as an opportunity for more advanced processing onshore. Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Christian Porter said the High Purity Alumina project is expected to support 200 people during construction and 140 ongoing staff over the life of the project. “The project will use an innovative process for producing the high-purity alumina which is expected to have a lower environmental footprint than the traditional production,” Porter said. “Not only will it improve global supplies of alumina, with forecast export revenue of A$6.8-billion, but the project will also provide a raft of economic and job benefits for regional communities in Western Australia.” Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said the project complements government’s Critical Minerals Strategy. “The project will process up to 198 000 t of high-purity alumina within the initial 25 year project timeframe, with an annual production capacity of 8 000 t/y, and will supply directly to China, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Europe and North America,” Pitt said. “In addition, it supports Australia’s policy to have more downstream processing capabilities developed locally.” Major Project status helps companies access extra support, coordination and information services from the Major Projects Facilitation Agency which acts as a single entry point into the Australian government regulatory approvals pathway.