State-owned Transnet National Ports Authority (TNPA) has appointed the Coega Development Corporation (CDC) as the implementing agent for the migration of the manganese terminal and the liquid bulk terminal to the Port of Ngqura, as well as their construction and operationalisation. The CDC and TNPA are working to implement the terminal relocation from the Port of Port Elizabeth, in Gqeberha, to the Port of Ngqura, within appropriate and realistic timelines. These facilities will be developed under the purview of Transnet to assist and support their operationalisation. The CDC’s role will include the review of the design and scope of work, to ensure the delivery of modern, state-of-the-art terminals that are designed to operate in accordance with world-class environmental standards, as well as to ensure their sustainability, in response to market needs. The current locations of the Tank Farm and the Manganese Terminal at the Port of Port Elizabeth are in areas that in future will be part of the Phase 2 of the proposed waterfront development, and an automotive terminal which aligns with Ford South Africa’s R15.8-billion investment, which requires the export of fully built automotive units through the Port of Port Elizabeth from the Tshwane Special Economic Zone (SEZ), which is currently under construction. The SEZ project is also being implemented by the CDC, which demonstrates the capability of the organisation in undertaking complex national projects. These much-anticipated developments in the Nelson Mandela Bay metropolitan municipality will contribute towards the facilitation of economic transformation through job creation and small, medium-sized and microenterprise development, as well as add to South Africa’s strategic intent to position itself as a world-class investment destination, TNPA said in a statement this week. The implementing agent agreement with the CDC will see TNPA also receive technical support, and delivery of services and systems for the overall delivery of port infrastructure. The collaboration will also assist to develop other national strategic projects including the gas-to-power project, slops operations, biofuels manufacturing and related logistics solutions. This mutually beneficial agreement between Transnet and the CDC is expected to have a notable multiplier effect on the economy of the country, for the benefit of the local community, society and the business sector at large.