PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Oil and gas major Woodside has set new emission reduction targets at its Pluto liquefied natural gas (LNG) project. Woodside on Tuesday revealed that under its Wood contemporized Pluto Greenhouse Gas Abatement program (GGAP), the company has set an interim target to abate 30% of emissions by 2030 and long-term targets to abate 100% of emissions by 2050. The targets are based on the proposed expansion of Pluto LNG and account for emissions associated with a two-train facility. Woodside will integrate a number of measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions at Pluto LNG by adopting technology considered to be best practice for LNG developments in Australia, implementing operational improvements and offsetting all reservoir carbon dioxide. Woodside acting CEO Meg O’Neill said the company shared the state government’s aspiration to reduce and offset carbon emissions to net zero by 2050. “We are pleased to have agreed these new contemporary greenhouse gas emission reduction targets with the state for Pluto LNG. The targets, which are based on the proposed expansion of the facility to enable the processing of gas from the offshore Scarborough field, demonstrate how we have applied our corporate decarbonisation targets at Pluto LNG. “These efforts are complemented by our investment in generating high-quality offsets and potential opportunities in renewable power and hydrogen,” she said. Western Australian Environment Minister Amber-Jade Sanderson on Tuesday said that the enhanced Greenhouse Gas Abatement program brought the Pluto LNG development's emissions reduction targets in line with the McGowan government's Greenhouse Gas Emissions Policy for Major Projects. "This is a significant advance in management of greenhouse gas emissions for this important project, committing both the existing and new trains to reduce emissions by 30% by 2030 and set a clear trajectory towards achieving net-zero by 2050. "I have asked the Environmental Protection Authority to inquire into updating the Ministerial Statement under which the project operates to ensure these new targets are enforceable and subject to transparent reporting measures,” she said. Woodside is currently investigating the supply of approximately 50 MW of solar energy to Pluto LNG from its proposed Woodside power project, which would result in a direct reduction in Scope 1 greenhouse gas emissions from Pluto LNG. The Pluto Greenhouse Gas Abatement program is a condition of primary state environmental approval granted for Pluto LNG in 2007. Woodside is proposing to develop the Scarborough gas resource through new offshore facilities connected by an approximately 430 km pipeline to a proposed expansion of the existing Pluto LNG onshore facility. Expansion includes modifications to the existing Train 1 and construction of a second gas processing train and additional domestic gas infrastructure. Scarborough gas will primarily be processed through Train 2 and contains negligible reservoir carbon dioxide. Combined with the adoption of best available proven technology in design, together, these developments will be amongst the lowest-carbon LNG sources globally for Woodside’s North Asian customers.