Mining and quarrying equipment specialist Pilot Crushtec has renewed its distributorship with minerals and metals processing technology company Metso Outotec in Southern Africa for five years, building on a successful five years of representing the company. Speaking to Engineering News & Mining Weekly, Pilot Crushtec sales and marketing director Francois Marais acclaims that, for consumers in the market who are dealing with Metso or who aspire to own Metso products, this extension will secure their investments going forward. “It is not a one-hit wonder, quick entrant into the market that might have a short lifespan. Consumers need to have security into their investments and this renewal certainly gives them that,” he enthuses. Under the terms of the extended agreement, Pilot Crushtec will distribute Metso’s entire mobile range of crushing and screening equipment, covering both the mining and aggregates sector. For the aggregates industry, Pilot Crushtec has full scope across Metso’s entire crushing and screening range – all of its fixed equipment, as well as mobile equipment. Moreover, Marais says the supply of spare and wear parts, as well as service and support from Pilot Crushtec’s field service technicians, is included in the distribution agreement. The new agreement also covers additional products and territories within the region, facilitating a wider offering in terms of new equipment and aftermarket needs. Marais says Pilot Crushtec was able to secure the extension owing to the success it enjoyed over the previous five-year agreement with Metso. After the first year of its distribution agreement with Metso, Pilot Crushtec was awarded the Best Aftersales Distributor, and in the company's fourth year of operation it was awarded Best Sales Growth. “As we ranked in the top three distributors for Metso in terms of sales volumes globally among all its distributors and because we have already shown our expertise in terms of aftermarket servicing, the company has seen a competent partner in us,” Marais acclaims. He highlights that the extension will engender security and investment for both companies. Finnish-based Metso has a considerable investment in South Africa and in Pilot Crushtec, and Pilot Crushtec also has a considerable investment into the company locally as well as into the Metso brand, explains Marais. “The extension for another five years, therefore, secures that investment for both parties, and ultimately, the one who benefits is our customers,” he enthuses. Moreover, he notes that the extension means that the companies can build on their solid working relationship from the past five years, and strengthen it in terms of exposure and experience, as well as the products it is able to deliver to the market. Following the renewal, he says Pilot Crushtec hopes to see growth in terms of market penetration. “We certainly believe that in the aggregates sector we can improve the market penetration that Metso currently enjoys. “Also, we will look to further entrench the Metso brand into the market as a premium offering.”