Dual-listed Sibanye-Stillwater’s sustainability strategy outlines a vision of superior value creation for all of its stakeholders through the responsible mining of its mineral resources. In this regard, the group has published updated environmental, social and corporate governance (ESG) policies and supporting position statements on its website. These updates include a human rights policy, stakeholder engagement policy, ESG policy, air quality position statement, biodiversity position statement, climate change position statement, energy and decarbonisation position statement, heritage positions statement, indigenous people and mining position statement, land position statement, partnership development position statement, socioeconomic closure position statement, transparency of mineral revenues position statement, waste management position statement, water health position statement, and water conservation and water demand management/water stewardship position statement. Other policies and governance documents are also available on the company’s website. In terms of climate change, the company’s vision is to contribute towards a global climate change solution through the reduction of greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions from its operations, the adoption of technologically innovative solutions to curb and manage the impacts of climate change and the pursuit of a measured transition towards a low-carbon future, in line with the goals of the Paris Agreement and other international protocols. Sibanye’s climate change position statement sets out its approach to, firstly, GHG inventory for combatting climate change and reducing its GHG emissions; and, secondly, a climate change response programme – entrenching climate adaptation and resilience practices in its operations. The company’s statement indicates that it is committed to contributing to global solutions by deploying responsible strategies and actions in the areas in which it operates. This includes driving and achieving a carbon-neutral position by 2040; driving an absolute reduction of Scope 1, 2 and 3 GHG emissions; and formulating a position on and investigating the feasibility of carbon offsets in line with legislation and other principles that can be used to offset carbon emissions and that have the potential to offset the financial liability imposed by carbon tax in specific jurisdictions. In terms of its ESG policy, the group’s statement says it seeks to build a sustainable post-mining economy, within its geographical footprint through the development of programmes that contribute to and support its ESG strategy. In terms of its approach to water conservation and water demand management (WCWDM), the group commits to sustainability using and sourcing water resources through several programmes and initiatives. These are the responsible use of water resources to maintain its environmental licence to operate; encouraging sound management of water systems and efficient water use; a reduction in impact on water resources; and driving environmental consciousness through awareness, stewardship and communication on environmental issues. The intent of the group towards WCWDM is to drive responsible behaviour that drives efficient and effective use of water resources with minimum impact on surrounding water resources to ensure availability of water resources for the affected ecosystem, surrounding communities and the company’s operations.