International organisation the International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM) has appointed sustainability specialist Rohitesh Dhawan to succeed Tom Bulter as ICMM CEO from April 6. The appointment was made after a competitive global selection process. Dhawan most recently served as Europe, Middle East and Africa region head and MD of geopolitical research and analysis firm Eurasia Group, where he led the climate change and sustainability practice. He previously served as advisory multinational KPMG International sustainability for the mining sector global head and global strategy director. He currently serves on the expert panel on climate change for the UK government’s Partnering for Accelerated Climate Transitions Programme (PACT). He is a Raisina Fellow of the Asian Forum on Global Governance, fellow and moderator at the Young Africa Leadership Initiative and serves on the advisory board of US-based global convening organisation Concordia. “Rohitesh brings a deep commitment to sustainable development, and strong on-the-ground experience. His extensive knowledge of the challenges and opportunities facing our industry will be invaluable as we work together to address some of the biggest issues facing our sector, and advancing important initiatives that reflect our collective commitment to continuous performance improvement,” ICMM chair and mining company Freeport-McMoRan chairperson and CEO Richard Adkerson says. “I would also like to recognise Tom’s outstanding contribution to the ICMM over the past six years and, on behalf of the council, I would like to thank him for his leadership and commitment. I am looking forward to working with Rohitesh to build on the strong foundation that Tom leaves behind,” he adds. Dhawan says he is excited to join the ICMM in arguably the most important decade for the industry. The foundations of a net-zero emissions economy are being laid now and minerals are critical to it. “But many environmental, social and governance challenges remain unresolved, and I can think of no better vehicle than the ICMM to convene the necessary solutions. I’m delighted to be in service of an industry that touches all our lives, and to join an organisation that is united in the goal of achieving the highest possible standards of sustainability,” he says. The ICMM incorporates 27 mining and metals companies and 37 national, regional and commodities associations. It strengthens environmental and social performance and serves as a catalyst for change, thereby enhancing mining’s contribution to society. Every ICMM company member adheres to its mining principles, which incorporate comprehensive environmental, social and governance requirements, robust site-level validation of performance expectations and credible assurance of corporate sustainability reports. “During my tenure we have tackled some key challenges, but much remains to be done. I am pleased to be handing the reins over to a strong leader for the next phase. I want to take this opportunity to thank our members and everyone in the ICMM team for their sterling support over the last six years,” Butler says.