Internationally diversified gold producer Nordgold has committed to achieving net zero carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions by 2050. To meet this target, Nordgold will further develop its criteria for all new projects, including new requirements for renewable power generation, as well as green mining fleets and supporting vehicles, processing and refining capacity. Projects with a life-of-mine reaching to 2050 and beyond will need a pathway to achieving net zero by 2050, while specific targets will be set for new projects with a life-of-mine not reaching to 2050 to ensure their contribution to achieving the overall objective of falling carbon emissions, says Nordgold. “Our net zero ambitions are backed by immediate actions and new approaches to help us make measurable progress, ensuring the 2050 commitment is met. Nordgold continues to invest in the most advanced equipment and make operational improvements to ensure our projects are as efficient as possible today. "While actively working on reducing our carbon emissions, we also have significant programmes in place to combat deforestation, and we are looking into how we can best enhance our carbon-offsetting approach,” comments Nordgold chief legal officer and environment, social and governance director Evgeny Tulubensky. Nordgold intends to develop medium-term strategic targets for reducing CO2 emissions at all its existing mines, which will help guide it through to net zero. Based on these targets, and in line with best market practices, a special report with a roadmap to net zero will be developed to be released with the company's 2021 financial results, which are due to be published in 2022. Meanwhile, at its Gross mining district, in Russia, the company is assessing grid connection options for the Tokko development project, with the intention to further extend grid power supply to the Gross and Taborny mines in the future. This will potentially enable the company to meet its power requirements using environment-friendly hydropower. Nordgold operates mines in Russia, Kazakhstan, Guinea and Burkina Faso.