PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The resources sector has welcomed a decision by the federal government to extend its wage subsidy scheme for apprentices and trainees for another year. Prime Minister Scott Morrison on Tuesday said that the expansion of the subsidy would generate some 70 000 new apprentice and trainee places, with the government investing some A$1.2-billion. “Creating jobs, generating economic opportunities and boosting the skills of workers right across Australia are at the heart of our National Economic Recovery Plan, as we build back from the Covid-19 recession,” the Prime Minister said. “With 100 000 new apprenticeship positions already snapped up, it highlights the confidence businesses have in the future of the Australian economy.” The scheme provides a 50% wage subsidy to support businesses which employ new and recommencing apprentices and trainees by September 2021. The Minerals Council of Australia on Tuesday said that the extension of the subsidy was "great news" for Australia’s mining regions. “Mining is already supporting jobs and regional economies in their time of need, including the employment of 8 836 apprentices and trainees, and more apprentices are needed to help create the future minerals workforce to meet growing demand for Australia’s world-class commodities,” CEO Tania Constable said.

She pointed to recent National Centre for Vocational Education Research figures, which showed that while apprenticeships across all industries were down 11%, the mining industry only experienced a 1.41% decrease.

“The broader Australian minerals industry is creating more than 5 000 apprenticeships working in partnership with the Australian government through the Mining Skills Organisation Pilot to modernise timely and efficient training of skilled tradespeople for faster outcomes with an initial focus on diesel mobile plant mechanics, an identified pressure point within the industry.

“The success of Australia’s resources sector and its ability to keep backing Australia’s regional communities depends on a highly skilled workforce which includes traditional and emerging trades,” Constable said. The Association of Mining and Exploration Companies (Amec) has also welcomed the boost to national apprenticeships, with CEO Warren Pearce noting that the government had made a smart investment decision into Australia’s future. “An apprenticeship is an investment in tomorrow, and the Commonwealth government has recognised that Australia’s future relies on these apprentices,” said Pearce.