South African multisector consulting company Taye Consulting has teamed up with Polish drill bits and mining equipment supplier Niuw Glinik. Through the partnership, Taye is aiming to increase participation in the mining sector by previously disadvantaged South Africans. Co-founded by Vincent Malunga and Lorraine Kljajic, Taye is a 100% black-owned company with consulting interests in various sectors including mining, marketing and sales, business strategy, information and communications technology, as well as process re-engineering, besides others. Niuw Glinik’s Jan Roszkowicz will be implementing this partnership in South Africa, as the company “wishes to expand its reach as a preferred supplier of drilling and mining equipment beyond its current footprint of Europe, the Americas and Asia and into Africa with South Africa as the gateway”. He explains that the company will compete on three key pillars of quality, service and affordability as “a holy trinity without compromise”. Malunga, meanwhile, says the partnership is “opportune” as all the “easily accessible minerals in South Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa have been accessed”. “It is time to start accessing the more challenging reserves be they in coal, gold, diamonds, platinum and a whole spectrum of minerals. This requires superior drilling equipment that is durable and reliable, yet cost effective,” he adds. Malunga further notes in a statement that “in this new wave of mining that should contribute to the revival of the post-Covid economy, there must simply be greater black participation throughout the mining value chain”. Niuw Glinik is part of Polish mining machinery and equipment manufacturing company Famur, with business interests ranging from machinery, metallurgy, steel construction, drilling rigs, geophysics and mining, besides others. The company employs 196 employees at its three-line manufacturing plant in Poland and 90% of its production is for the export market. Its turnover in 2019 was $20-million.