PERTH (miningweekly.com) – A critical minerals research center has been launched at the University of Adelaide, to carry out multidisciplinary research in the discovery and extraction of critical minerals to benefit society. “The Australian Critical Minerals Research Centre will conduct comprehensive critical minerals research, from exploration to resource definition and mineral processing,” said University of Adelaide associate professor Carl Spandler who is director of the centre. “It is the only centre of its kind in Australia, and one of only a few worldwide. “Our research aims to increase Australia’s sovereign supply of critical minerals, including how they are found, refined and manufactured, how they occur as byproducts in other deposits, and how they can be separated from non-target elements.” “With its critical mass of world-class researchers, the Australian Critical Minerals Research Centre is ideally positioned to lead ethical, environmentally responsible work to help achieve Australia’s strategic aim to more fully utilise its abundance of critical minerals for the benefit of our local and global communities,” said Professor Peter Hoj, vice-chancellor and president of the University of Adelaide. “The University of Adelaide has the talent and ambition to cover end-to-end critical minerals research and education, and is equipped to work with industry and government in discovering and developing Australia’s critical mineral resources.” Spandler, who was recruited by the university to its ‘Top Talent’ programme in early 2020, noted that any natural resource can become critical when its supply is at risk, whether it be due to geology, geopolitics, economics, or social and environmental issues. “The Australian Critical Minerals Research Centre will bring the breadth of research needed to help secure Australia’s critical mineral resources into the future,” he added. The establishment of the Australian Critical Minerals Research Center comes just days after the federal government unveiled its Resources Technology and Critical Minerals Processing roadmap, that would leverage Australia’s world-leading critical minerals and resources sector to create more jobs and economic opportunities for manufacturing businesses over the next ten years. The government has made available A$1.3-billion in funding under its Modern Manufacturing Initiative to help manufacturers scale-up production, commercialise products and tap into global supply chains.