The World Diamond Council (WDC) and the Responsible Jewellery Council (RJC) have entered into a cross-membership partnership and signed mutual codes of conduct, which will help increase knowledge-sharing, pilot new initiatives and increase the positive impact they both make on the lives and livelihoods of individuals and communities associated with jewellery, watches and the precious materials from which they are made. The increased cooperation between the organisations will see an RJC official joining the WDC Kimberley Process Task Force to take part in critical discussions about the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS). This includes the expansion of the definition of conflict diamonds and principles for responsible diamond sourcing, as well as the worldwide adoption of the WDC’s revised System of Warranties (SoW). For its part, a WDC official will join the RJC Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) Task Force, which is an action platform for the jewellery and watch industry committed to the achievement of the SDGs, and both appointments will take place with immediate effect. Over the course of the partnership, both the WDC and the RJC will report to their members on progress with the SoW and SDGs, and support members of the industry in applying the relevant programmes and principles into their own business systems with the help of case studies, hands-on workshops and a continued dialogue with policy-makers and investors. “Cooperation at this level is critical to raising the level of knowledge about responsible sourcing, driving action and having a positive impact on all businesses, small and large, at every level of the diamond supply chain,” says WDC executive director Elodie Daguzan, who notes that the partnership will help to “increase understanding of the KPCS and present a united industry front dedicated to broadening its scope through the expansion of the definition of conflict diamonds”. She adds that cooperation will also fast-track the adoption of WDC’s revised SoW, creating a standard industry baseline for KPCS compliance and commitment to fundamental human and labour rights, and anti-money laundering and anticorruption principles. “Uniting the positive forces of the RJC and the WDC is a major milestone in our industry, and I am inspired by what we can achieve together, partnering to promote the fulfilment of the 17 SDGs in the industry,” says RJC executive director Iris Van der Veken. Commenting on the agreement, WDC president Edward Asscher says that “partnering with the RJC creates exciting opportunities for our industry. Since 2000, the WDC’s entire purpose has been to preserve the integrity of the natural diamond and that of the industry that mines, manufactures and sells it”. He adds that this agreement not only means increased understanding of the role played by the Kimberley Process and the critical governance that it provides, but it “also strengthens our industry’s reputation, as a business sector dedicated to improving the lives of all our members, stakeholders, communities and countries”. RJC chairperson David Bouffard also welcomed the partnership with the WDC.