PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Japanese multinational Sumitomo Corporation has formalised a partnership with Gladstone Ports Corporation, Gladstone Regional Council, CQUniversity Australia and Australian Gas Industry Group to develop Australia’s first hydrogen ecosystem in Central Queensland. The proposed Hydrogen Park Gladstone supports Queensland’s target of net zero emissions by 2050, and the state’s hydrogen strategy, aiming for Gladstone to be a key hub for domestic and exported hydrogen. The A$4.2-million Gladstone facility will produce renewable hydrogen using water and renewable electricity from the local electricity grid, using a 175 kW electrolyser. The renewable hydrogen will be blended with natural gas, at volumes of up to 10% for supply to more than 770 existing customers on Gladstone’s entire gas network. Queensland Minister for Energy, Renewables and Hydrogen Mick de Brenni said the collaboration shows international confidence in Queensland as a global destination for investment and as a future reliable renewable energy exporter. “Today’s signing is a major endorsement of international investor confidence, that a global corporation in Sumitomo is working with Queensland and local companies to deliver renewable hydrogen,” De Brenni said. “We know countries around the world, like Japan, have mandated decarbonisation and set clear targets, and they’re looking to Queensland for help to meet them. “With access to existing water and gas pipeline infrastructure and publicly-owned ports giving crucial access to domestic and international markets, Queensland is well placed to supply renewable hydrogen to the world, and Sumitomo recognises this. “Gladstone’s Hydrogen Ecosystem project will prove supply chains and grow a domestic hydrogen market, with the ultimate prize being more Queensland exports from right here in Gladstone.” Sumitomo Corporation’s executive officer Hajime Mori said the company is proud to be championing building the Hydrogen Ecosystem in the Gladstone region alongside such esteemed stakeholders. “With exceptional solar radiance and sophisticated regional partners and infrastructure, Gladstone is a unique world class location for renewable hydrogen production and regional utilisation with significant export potential,” Mori said. Minister for Regional Development and Manufacturing Glenn Butcher said Central Queensland would continue to play a key role in meeting global hydrogen demand. “By 2030, Queensland will need a fully integrated, export-scale hydrogen supply chain if we are to meet the demand from countries like Japan,” Butcher said. “Fortunately, Gladstone has an outstanding record in the development of energy exports from a standing start, considering we grew our A$70-billion liquefied natural gas industry in just under a decade. “The development of a modern, world-leading energy sector is critical to growing Queensland manufacturing and sustaining our resources sector.” The Gladstone Hydrogen Ecosystem design study is targeted to commence next month