LSE-listed sustainable technologies company Johnson Matthey and JSE- and NYSE-listed gold and platinum group metals (PGMs) miner Sibanye-Stillwater have formed a strategic partnership to secure critical metals and accelerate new battery technologies for a low-carbon future. The collaboration will support the development of science and technologies for new products and markets that will underpin sustainable supply chains for a low-carbon future, including clean hydrogen production and fuel cells. The partnership will also drive circularity and reduce carbon footprints in critical metal supply chains for customers across many global industries, as well as provide security of PGMs supply for key technologies and end-users. The challenge of tackling climate change has resulted in nations around the world setting net zero targets to drive decarbonisation through supply chains, while at the same time, customers and consumers are increasingly demanding responsibly-sourced raw materials and products. The partnership between the two companies will focus on developing a number of opportunities to drive technological innovation and ensure more sustainable supply chains for customers. As such, Johnson Matthey and Sibanye will collaborate on the sourcing and application of PGMs and metals used in battery technology to enable the development and commercialisation of low-carbon technologies. This will be focused on circularity and sustainability. In addition, the companies will examine potential opportunities to apply their collective experience to support the development of more sustainable supply chains for battery materials. The companies will combine their extensive expertise in metals recycling to improve current technologies, particularly for difficult-to-recover materials. Further, the strategic partnership builds on the existing relationship between the two companies, which has ensured security of supply of crucial PGMs into many industries. Johnson Matthey and Sibanye have also extended their current PGM supply and refining agreements to ensure long-term sustainable supply for Johnson Matthey’s products and customers. Johnson Matthey CE Robert MacLeod says the company is excited to contribute its complementary expertise to help secure a more sustainable future for “tomorrow’s industry”. Sibanye CEO Neal Froneman says this “world-class partnership” will further advance the miner’s commitment to creating a greener future, by developing technologies for a “better tomorrow”, using the metals it produces. “Fast-tracking green technology and working together to achieve environmental, social and corporate governance excellence will enable us to continue to improve lives and the environment.” COMBINED EXPERTISE
Johnson Matthey undertakes science that enables a more sustainable future, including technologies for clean hydrogen production, fuel cell products, next-generation battery materials and solutions for the decarbonisation of the manufacture of chemicals. As a significant player in the fabrication and recycling (secondary refiner) of PGMs, Johnson Matthey states that it is abreast of a closed loop circular approach to increase metal reuse. Sibanye – a major player in the precious metals industry – has also recently forayed into the battery metals supply chain through an equity investment in and partnership with Keliber Oy – a lithium hydroxide project in Finland. Sibanye is a player in the global recycling of spent catalytic converter materials containing PGMs and has recently achieved an A-rating by nonprofit global environmental disclosure platform CDP, in recognition of its climate change action and disclosure.