PERTH (miningweekly.com) - The Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) has called on the Australian governments to support the oil and gas industry as it continues to support the national economy. Speaking at the Regional Australia Institute’s Regions Rising National Summit in Canberra, Appea CEO Andrew McConville noted that Australian state and territory governments would need to secure long-term business investment with the right policy settings, support the responsible onshore development of oil and gas resources, and invest in the technological advancements to deliver a cleaner energy future, if the oil and gas industry was to succeed. “The Australian government’s ‘gas fired recovery’ is an important first step to encourage investment in new projects - committing to support new development in gas basins in the Northern Territory, Queensland and we hope, Western Australia,” said McConville. “Australia has world-class resources reserves and developing these basins along existing reserves in regions like Gippsland, the Otways, the Cooper and Surat and Narrabri, is critical to the enduring supply challenge Australia faces and to the continued growth of our regional communities. “But more action is needed. Kickstarting investment and future-proofing jobs requires a supportive policy environment that can attract investment over the long-term.” McConville noted that Appea had identified four areas where policy action was needed to stabilise the industry, fast-track recovery and facilitate investment needed to creation regional jobs. These four areas include: fiscal settings, streamlining and reducing red and green tape regulation, encouraging exploration and allowing markets to work. “The onshore gas industry makes a significant contribution to regional economies through direct jobs, local contracts and community investment. “Beyond the direct jobs and investment in rural and regional towns, onshore gas powers our regional hospitals, schools, mines, manufacturers and transport sectors. And when regulated effectively and managed professionally, onshore development is safe,” McConville said. He told delegates that responsible onshore development presents a significant opportunity to create jobs and develop Australia's regional communities. “The oil and gas industry understands the importance of being responsible, not just in how we manage the environmental impacts of onshore development, but in how we work with regional communities and landowners. “In Australia’s most prosperous regions, agriculture has long been the economic partner to the industry. And so I talk to our members about the practice of being a good neighbour. Forging agreements. Building strong relationships. Listening. Collaborating. “Landholders hosting natural gas infrastructure receive a significant new financial stream that isn’t dependent on weather and agricultural commodity price cycles, and they can also benefit from upgraded farm infrastructure and low-cost water. “So responsible onshore gas development isn’t just future-proofing jobs in our industry, but in other industries important to regional Australia,” McConville said. Meanwhile, McConville also pointed out that gas was expected to play a central and long-term role as Australia transitioned into a lower-emissions economy with the prioritisation of emission reduction technologies recognising that natural gas can achieve large-scale emissions abatement while creating sustainable jobs and delivering significant economic opportunity for Australia. “As a lower emissions fuel, increasing natural gas in electricity generation would reduce the emissions intensity of electricity generation. Natural gas also has the right characteristics to make it the ideal complement to renewable energy sources. “When the wind doesn’t blow or the sun doesn’t shine, or in periods of peak demand, natural gas-fired generators can be easily and quickly ramped up to meet demand and ensure grid stability,” he said.