Industry organisation the South African Institute of Auctioneers (SAIA) says there has been an increase in complaints levelled at auctioneers who do not fulfill their obligations to deliver goods, or who choose to provide alternative goods that are not what the customers bid for. Problems associated with the refunding of deposits, where these are required, were also reported, SAIA said on March 16. Covid-19 lockdown restrictions have led to an unprecedented migration to online auctions as a means of selling anything from properties and cars to office furniture and even household goods. New companies are emerging using social media marketing to encourage buyers to bid or make offers on goods and buyers in the mining industry can be duped into participating in a sales process or so-called auction that is not transparent, legal or safe, SAIA warned. “It is only when problems arise that the bidder realises he or she is dealing with unprofessional sellers purporting to be bonafide auctioneers. This should send a clear signal to the public to only deal with professional, registered auctioneers who are members of SAIA,” says SAIA chairperson John Cowing. “Before committing to purchase on a so-called auction site, a simple check on the SAIA webpage will dispel any concerns you may have. Our members have remained resilient in the face of the virus and are among the leaders in online auctioneering.” The institute’s members comply with all legal requirements to ensure honest and fair auctions. Most will display their membership credentials on their website which can be verified by our office, if the bidder has any doubt. “Our members are responsible custodians of assets who prescribe to our code of conduct. You are well advised to establish who you are dealing with before parting with money. These auctions are putting a stain on our industry and we hope, in time through the introduction of legislation, we will be able to eradicate these illicit traders. “While we actively promote the growth of the industry and the uptake of new technologies, we do not support these organised crime syndicates. You can often find bargains at auction, but, put simply, if it sounds too good to be true, it probably is not true. It also pays to go to the institute’s website www.auctioneering.co.za to explore member offerings or phone the hotline on 021 813 6342 or WhatsApp 067 117 7049 with any queries,” concludes Cowing.