PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Former Chief Scientist Dr Alan Finkel has been appointed to serve in the newly created role of Special Adviser to the Australian government for Low Emissions Technology. As Special Adviser, Finkel will conduct strategic engagement in support of the government’s technology-led approach to reducing emissions. Federal Energy and Emissions Reduction Minister Angus Taylor said on Friday that achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement would require practical pathways for all countries to reduce emissions while growing their economies. “Accelerating new and emerging technologies to technical and commercial parity with existing approaches will unlock widespread global deployment. This is the only way to enable all countries, both developed and developing, to reduce emissions while increasing prosperity and creating jobs. “Australia has an enviable track record for meeting and beating its emission reduction targets, and we are on track to do so again in 2030. We will continue to meet and exceed our international commitments through the deployment of technology, not taxes,” said Taylor. He noted that the Australian Technology Investment Roadmap would guide A$18-billion of government investment in low emissions technologies over the next 10 years and leverage at least A$70-billion of new investment from the private sector and other levels of government by 2030. “On behalf of the government, Dr Finkel has already commenced engagement with potential international partners on increasing investment in shared research and development, including Australia-based pilot projects. “Dr Finkel is well-positioned to excel in this role, having unique technical expertise, strong business connections, and the necessary domestic and international profile gained from his time as Australia’s Chief Scientist from 2016 to 2020. “I welcome Dr Finkel’s appointment and look forward to working with him to promote Australia’s practical, technology-led approach to reducing emissions,” Taylor said.