PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Diversified miner Rio Tinto has partnered with ASX-listed Amaero Additive Manufacturing to provide a first commercial batch of high-performance aluminium-scandium alloy from its North American operations for processing into powder for three-dimensional (3D) printing. This first sale is being delivered through Rio’s unique position as a producer of both aluminium and scandium, and its technical capability to develop specialised alloys, the miner said this week. Under the agreement, Rio will deliver alloy billets made of responsibly produced, low carbon aluminium from its hydro-powered Canadian smelters and high purity scandium oxide from its Rio Tinto Fer et Titane (RTFT) metallurgical complex in Sorel-Tracy, Quebec. The billets will be processed by Amaero into powder for 3D printing and offered to the market for high temperature applications. The scandium oxide will be supplied from a new plant Rio is building in Sorel-Tracy, bringing the first North American supply source to the world. The plant will use an innovative recovery process developed by Rio scientists to extract high purity scandium oxide from the waste streams of titanium dioxide production, without the need for any additional mining. The companies will also collaborate to develop the supply chain for Amaero’s high performance, high operating temperature aluminium alloy (Amaero HOT Al) and commercialise this lightweight material for applications in the aerospace, defence and other industries. “As a global leader in aluminium and the first producer of high-quality scandium oxide in North America, Rio is uniquely positioned to provide a secure source of aluminium-scandium alloy to the market,” Rio aluminium VP for sales and marketing Tolga Egrilmezer said. “Aluminium-scandium alloy is the material of choice where a lightweight, high-strength material with thermal resistance and good welding properties is needed, such as for defence and aerospace applications. This first sale demonstrates our ability to develop products that meet our customers’ needs, drawing on our technical expertise and world class assets.” Amaero CEO Barrie Finnin said the company was very pleased to enter this agreement with Rio to purchase the first commercial batch of aluminium scandium alloy from a North American source. “This is an important step in the commercialisation of this high performance alloy that will be used in our breakthrough 3D metal printing technology. We look forward to working with Rio to progress the production of the alloy so we can commence the qualification process with key customers in the aerospace sector and other industries.” Finnin said that the agreement aligned with Amaero’s long-term strategy of expanding its offering through the commercialisation of a new generation of high performance alloys developed by the company and its research partners.