TSX-V-listed diamond and metals exploration company Tsodilo Resources has received approval to start trading on the OTCQB Venture Market under the symbol TSDRF as of the start of trading on March 4. Chairperson and CEO James Bruchs says the company believes a secondary listing on this market will provide the company with increased access to US institutional and retail investors and a broader shareholder base. “US investors will have the opportunity to share in Tsodilo’s growth as investor interest in mineral resources and their development continue their momentum as the world emerges economically from the devastating effects of the Covid-19 pandemic.” The miner is engaged in the search for economic diamond and metal deposits, as well as industrial stone. It owns the Bosoto diamond project; the Gcwihaba Resources base, precious, platinum-group metals and rare earth minerals project; and the Newdico industrial stone projects, in Botswana. It also has a 70% stake in the Idada 361 gold and silver project in Barberton, South Africa. The OTCQB offers developing Canadian companies the benefits of being publicly traded in the US with lower cost and complexity than a US exchange listing. Streamlined market standards of the venture exchange enable Canadian companies to provide a strong baseline of transparency to inform and engage US investors. To be eligible, Canadian companies must be current in their System for Electronic Data Analysis and Retrieval reporting and undergo a yearly verification and management certification process. As a verified market with efficient access to US investors, the OTCQB helps Canadian companies build shareholder value with a goal of enhancing liquidity and achieving fair valuation. OTCQB companies provide current company information and meet financial standards that enable brokers to more easily quote and trade a security. Through the OTCQB, listed companies can engage a far greater network of US investors, data distributors and media partners, ensuring US investors have access to the same high-quality information that is available to investors in Canada, but through US platforms and portals, to conduct research.