ASX- and LSE-listed potash developer Danakali, in evaluating the potential of incorporating renewable energy into its 100%-owned Colluli sulphate of potash (SoP) project, in Eritrea, reports early sound feasibility to incorporate wind and/or solar into the project. Danakali is continuing to evaluate its renewable energy options of solar, wind and geothermal energy, with a view to becoming a zero carbon producer of SoP. The project is a 50:50 joint venture between Danakali and the Eritrean National Mining Corporation (Enamco). With both wind and solar proving viable options, Danakali will now work with its preferred power provider, Aggreko, on further developing these solutions. In addition to wind and solar, Danakali also points out that Colluli is located in the Danakil depression which lies within the East African Rift Valley, one of the world’s most geothermally-endowed rifts. Significantly, the mining licence area is in close proximity to known geothermal gradients including at Alid, located on  the axis of the Danakil depression, between the Red Sea and the Afar Triple Junction. Alid has been recognised by the Eritrean Ministry of Mines and Energy (MoEM) as a potential high geothermal resource owing to the evidence of various surface manifestations and the presence of underground magma. In 1996, detailed geological and geochemical work funded by USAID and conducted by the US Geological Survey and MoEM identified a high-temperature reservoir at Alid. Samples collected indicate a reservoir temperature of a hydrothermal-convection system likely to be in the range of 250 oC – 300 oC. Danakali says this is “extremely promising” as a geothermal power source. The company points out that follow-up work in 2015 demonstrated structural trends and temperature permeability that are favourable for an electric grade geothermal resource. The miner also highlights that geothermal and other renewable energy sources are set out in Eritrea’s national renewable energy policy and development framework. As such, Danakali will use the impressive body of work already conducted in Eritrea to develop its plans and further its commitment to carbon neutral SoP production. Danakali executive chairperson Seamus Cornelius says the company is determined to embrace renewable energy and run its business in a way that delivers positive environmental impacts for Eritrea and the world. “Our initial goal is to create a responsible, environmentally friendly, zero carbon, premium fertiliser business that clearly links Colluli SoP with the production of nutritious crops, bolsters global food and nutrition security, and improves millions of lives."