Anglo-Australian multinational Rio Tinto has released updated information about its global tailings facilities to align with the requirements of the Global Industry Standard for Tailings Management (GISTM), which was published in August 2020. The GISTM is an initiative co-convened by the International Council on Mining and Metals, the United Nations Environment Programme and the Principles for Responsible Investment. The latest disclosure builds on previously disclosed information on each of Rio Tinto’s global tailings facilities released in June 2019 and the publication of Rio Tinto’s Group Procedure and updated Standard for 'Management of tailings and water storage facilities' in February 2019. The changes to existing data are in line with guidance contained in the GISTM including updating information previously disclosed. As per the June 2019 disclosure, all facilities have been awarded a consequence classification in accordance with the regulatory or industry body that oversees tailings in each region or jurisdiction. Additional technical data from recently updated downstream impact assessments required under the GISTM and Rio Tinto’s own internal tailings standard have resulted in a modification to hazard classifications of some facilities within the company’s global operations. Consequence classifications are not a rating of the condition of a facility or the likelihood of failure but on the potential consequence if there were to be a failure. All Rio Tinto managed facilities are subject to three levels of governance and assurance. The first level of assurance takes place at the asset itself, with the main tenets being effective facility design, comprehensive operational controls and regular reviews. Independent reviews of the operations must be conducted at least every two years. The second level is assurance to the Rio Tinto standard through periodic business conformance audits and technical reviews, supported by Rio Tinto's Surface Mining Centre of Excellence. This third level of assurance is independent of site management and normally conducted by third parties. In addition, all Rio Tinto managed facilities, whether active or inactive, have an external engineer of record or design engineer. 2020 PERFORMANCE There were no tailings or water storage facility-related failures at the group’s managed operations in 2020. Rio Tinto in 2020 updated its group safety standard for all tailings and larger water storage facilities. Moreover, it reviewed its relevant standards against the requirements of the GISTM, released in August 2020, including how it classifies consequences and how and when it implements independent reviews. “Our relevant standards are well aligned with the GISTM,” the group said. The group also completed the technical risk review programme at each of its managed and non-managed TSFs last year. The review programme, which began in 2019, found that while its TSFs are generally well managed and there are no immediate dam safety threats, there are opportunities for improvement. Accordingly, Rio Tinto has implemented improvement plans for water storage facilities and TSFs and is working towards completing outstanding actions. While global Covid-19 pandemic restrictions have delayed a few items, the group plans to complete all outstanding actions as quickly as possible, while adhering to restrictions in each jurisdiction.