PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The federal government will invest A$3-million to expand the Tasmanian Exploring for the Future programme, to uncover resources in the region and to investigate its potential for critical minerals. “We want to invest in Tasmania’s resources potential to bring future wealth and jobs to the state,” federal Resources, Water and Northern Australia Minister Keith Pitt said. “Critical minerals are an important part of our future and are key inputs for an increasing range of high-tech applications, including advanced manufacturing, health technologies and defence and space industries.” Selected Tasmanian ore deposits will be studied by Geosciences Australia to determine the age of mineralisation and this information used to help characterise the mineral resource potential of the region. Tasmania Minister for Resources Guy Barnett said Tasmania has some of the country's richest geology, with the mining sector a key pillar of the local economy. “The Exploring for the Future programme will be crucial to explore, research and identify more of Tasmania's natural mineral resources. This research plays a vital role in unlocking future mining development, further investment and more jobs in regional Tasmania.” Barnett said that the Tasmanian government would also commit a further A$2-million investment over four years to a new Geoscience Initiative. “Sampling of these deposits will take place in April 2021 in collaboration with Mineral Resources Tasmania and initial results are anticipated by the first half of 2022,” Pitt said. “This information will support a better understanding of regional mineral systems and, therefore, support exploration strategies with increased success rates.” Some of the work being done in Tasmania forms part of a broader study into the Delamerian arc that extends across south-eastern Australia. This will provide a better understanding of this regional mineral-forming system that extends into western Tasmania. “Collating and interpreting this geological information will improve the understanding of mineral potential in the region and hopefully lead to increased mineral exploration in Tasmania in future years,” Pitt added. “Having already seen immense value in the geological data we uncovered in northern Australia during Phase 1 of the Exploring for the Future programme, we know this is a successful approach that is already paying dividends.”