PERTH (miningweeky.com) – The federal government has approved a suite of measures to enhance and strengthen Australia’s offshore oil and gas decommissioning framework. The measures were developed as part of consultation on the Offshore Oil and Gas Decommissioning Review in December and January, and include strengthening existing trailing liability provisions to enable government to call back a former titleholder in a broader range of circumstances, and increased oversight of changes in company control. The measures were also aimed at increasing requirements for financial assurance, modernising field development plans and enhancing decomissioning plans, the earlier and proactive use of remedial directions powers if required, and improved transparency and public engagment on decomissionings. Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said the measures will ensure the offshore decommissioning framework is clear and fit for purpose. “Australia’s offshore oil and gas industry has supported Australia’s energy security and economic activity for over 50 years and it will continue to be an important economic and energy security driver for the foreseeable future,” Pitt said. “The enhanced framework will make certain that there is effective regulatory oversight and robust financial and accountability safety nets for offshore oil and gas decommissioning requirements. “It will strengthen protections for the environment, the industry, the Australian government and taxpayers.” Pitt said that a mix of legislation and regulation changes will support the measures, starting with the release of an Exposure Draft of a Bill to improve Australia’s offshore oil and gas decommissioning regime. The Bill is open for comment until April 23. “The Bill also gives effect to the relevant recommendations of the Walker Review. It expands existing trailing liability provisions, increases oversight of changes in titleholder ownership and control, and increases scrutiny on companies operating, or looking to operate, within the regime,” said Pitt. The National Offshore Petroleum Administrator’s power to require this information is also being strengthened. The framework will be implemented using a staggered approach, with further consultation with industry and other stakeholders as each measure is developed. “It is important to strike a balance between implementing regulatory safeguards for Australian taxpayers, managing the impost on industry while encouraging continued investment in oil and gas development,” Pitt said.