Nonprofit association the Energy Intensive User Group (EIUG) on April 30 said its new member Namibian and South African zinc mining company Black Mountain Mining (BMM) will strengthen the association and diversify its portfolio through the addition of the zinc industry. The EIUG is committed to working with government, power utilities and other stakeholders to ensure South Africa has an energy supply industry that is financially viable, technically healthy and well managed. The membership will enable BMM to double its mining production and potentially anchor beneficiation of zinc metal in South Africa, which will, in turn, make South Africa a net exporter of zinc, the association noted. The membership gives BMM an opportunity to realise its objectives of building a sustainable value chain, resulting in industrialisation in the region and being globally competitive after securing a consistent power supply at a low tariff from State-owned power utility Eskom, it added. BMM is part of diversified mining multinational Vedanta Zinc International (VZI). BMM has zinc assets in South Africa and Namibia. The operations in Deeps and Swartberg produce polymetallic ore containing zinc, lead, copper, silver and magnetite, while openpit operations in Gamsberg produce zinc and lead. These assets are in the town of Aggeneys, in the Northern Cape. VZI employs about 2 700 people directly and indirectly, of which about 99% are local South Africans, around 80% are from the Northern Cape and about 60% from the Namakwa district where operations are located, making it one of the largest employers in the Northern Cape, the EIUG said. "There is a need for decarbonisation of our economy to save our planet and ensure that South Africa remains a global competitor in this regard. To this end, there is an urgent need for restructuring of our Electricity Supply Industry to deal with these challenges," the association said. Large power users, therefore, need the collective wisdom of all role players to confront the challenges ahead and to ensure that South Africa continues to industrialise, grow and prosper. The EIUG welcomes BMM and is committed to working with the company to achieve our shared objective of growing the South African economy.