Cold-chain monitoring and ultralow freezer storage of biologicals and vaccines for the pharmaceutical and health segment have increased in importance. However, as the Covid-19 pandemic has demonstrated, providing a cold supply chain for temperature-sensitive pharmaceutical products, such as vaccines, can be a logistical challenge. With the Covid-19 vaccination programme gathering pace, vaccine distribution has seen demand for platinum-based temperature sensors grow, with manufacturers such as technology group Heraeus increasing production capacity as a result, industry organisation the World Platinum Investment Council says. It notes that platinum-based resistance temperature detectors (RTDs) are ideal for temperature measurement in challenging applications, including low temperatures. Their linear characteristics allow precise temperature sensing over a wide range, from -200 °C to +1 000 °C. Uses include the monitoring of production-process temperature stability; cryo-transport box temperature during transport; and ultralow storage cooler temperature, explains the council. Platinum RTD sensors are highly accurate, even after years of service, with a typical lifetime of 15 to 20 years. For the vaccine programme, this translates to secure monitoring and temperature control for the complete cold-chain, from shipment to storage, the council notes. SUSTAINABLE HEALTHCARE Meanwhile, in a world first, platinum in hydrogen fuel cells is soon to be used to demonstrate the potential for fuel-cell electric vehicles (FCEVs) to assist with the decarbonisation of mobile medical services, the council informs. In Japan, the Red Cross Kumamoto Hospital and Toyota Motor Corporation (Toyota) have agreed to begin testing an FCEV mobile clinic, which will use hydrogen to generate electricity, by the summer of 2021. In addition to zero-emission treatment and transportation of patients, the Red Cross Kumamoto Hospital and Toyota believe that the FCEV mobile clinic could offer a range of services, including supplying electricity to blood donation buses and medical examination vehicles, travelling to less-populated areas as a mobile clinic and acting as a mobile Covid-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing vehicle. Moreover, it is thought that FCEV mobile clinics could assist when medical services are needed in disaster-affected areas, where they could also be used to provide emergency power to homes and evacuation centres. In South Africa, seven hydrogen fuel cells have been deployed at a field hospital in Pretoria as the primary source of power, further demonstrating their versatility in reliably providing carbon-free power at short notice, the council acclaims. The field hospital was set up towards the end of last year as part of the South African government’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic, which highlighted the need to respond with speed and flexibility in providing high care facilities for those who need them most, the council elaborates.