Resources company Exxaro Resources has announced the appointment of Chanda Joanne Nxumalo to the board as independent nonexecutive director and says she is set to play a key role in the group’s energy growth strategy. Nxumalo is an electrical engineer by training, having also obtained a master's degree in engineering, economics and management from the University of Oxford. With over 15 years of experience working locally and internationally in the renewable energy sector, Exxaro says she has the know-how to support the group’s focus on realising value through clean and renewable energy. She started her career as an engineer in the US, before making the move to working on energy projects across Africa as a renewable energy consultant. “This means that she truly understands all aspects of the renewable energy business,” Exxaro acclaims. “My passion is driving change and Exxaro has a very exciting strategy to drive sustainability and to facilitate a Just Transition both in the minerals and energy sectors,” Nxumalo says. Although South Africa’s economy is still reliant on coal-fired power, Nxumalo notes that she is excited about the opportunities the county has to reimagine a renewable energy future. “South Africa has an endowment of not only coal and minerals but also of renewable energy potential with options that include solar, wind, hydro and other new technologies. As a country, we can really benefit from using these resources. "In South Africa, even the province with the worst solar resource has better solar resource than Germany, which has 52 GW of solar energy capacity installed. We only have 4 GW of energy capacity installed, so there is still so much potential for growth,” she notes. Exxaro shares this vision and has been incorporating renewable energy solutions into its portfolio since 2010, the company indicated. Its acquisition of the remaining 50% of Cennergi, which owns and operates wind farms in the Eastern Cape, is the first step on a journey to be carbon neutral by 2050. Nxumalo says businesses have a critical role to play when it comes to decreasing carbon emissions and global warming. Companies need to focus on reducing carbon emissions as well as fossil fuel energy usage looking at energy efficiency measures, reducing demand and assessing the energy system holistically. Like Exxaro, Nxumalo is also passionate about ensuring a just transition to a low-carbon future. “We need to take into consideration the communities that we’re working with, putting in place measures to enable them to participate in the changing economies that will emerge in the future. “This includes providing training and retraining for the staff of Exxaro, and also extends to finding ways to support small businesses and communities,” she explains. Exxaro CEO Mxolisi Mgojo welcomes Nxumalo to the board, emphasising how pleased he is that her vision for the future is aligned so perfectly with Exxaro’s.