PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Queensland state government on Thursday launched the Queensland Resources Industry Development Plan (QRIDP), aimed at creating more growth, jobs and investment in the state’s resource sector. Resources Minister Scott Stewart said the QRIDP was about working with industry, the regions and communities to set a shared vision for the future of the sector. “Supporting the resources sector was a key part of Queensland’s plan for economic recovery from the global coronavirus pandemic,” the Minister said. “Under this plan, there will be a key focus on removing barriers to growth and identifying immediate actions to help regional communities recover from the impacts of Covid-19. It will also focus on setting targets for industry growth and deliver actions to responsibly unlock resources into the future.” Stewart pointed out that since 2015, A$21-billion has been invested in or committed to resources projects in Queensland, creating some 8 000 jobs. “There are great opportunities for the resources sector to grow in the future, particularly as the world looks to new age minerals like scandium, cobalt and vanadium for its growing needs and Queensland can be at the forefront of this. “So there is always work to do as we embrace and plan for the challenges and opportunities that we will experience over coming years to ensure a strong, resilient sector.” Stewart said growth, clean energy, exploration, investment and adding more value to the state’s resources through local industry were all on the table to shape the future of Queensland’s coal, minerals and gas industries. “We will soon be engaging communities, mining and resources companies, workers, local councils and businesses reliant on the sector to drill down on the details and shape our future. “The findings will form the basis of a draft plan that we will be releasing later this year.” Queensland Resources Council CEO Ian Macfarlane said the QRIDP was a critical step to attract new investment and create new jobs for Queensland. “This is an important step to begin consultation with all stakeholders including companies, communities and the workers who want to see the resources sector continue to thrive,” Macfarlane said. “The future is bright for our sector, from coal, gas and metals to the renewables, critical minerals and hydrogen technology that will help keep our economy strong in a low-emissions future.” Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) acting director for Queensland Matt Paull said the QRIDP represented an opportunity for our state to tap into all that natural gas had to offer. “A recent EY report found the with the right policy settings our industry could create A$350-billion in economic value and more than 220 000 jobs over the next two decades with a lot of these in Queensland,” Paull said. “Natural gas’ role in helping lower emissions and supporting the growth of renewables will be vital over the years to come. The government’s QRIDP represents an opportunity for our state to tap into all that natural gas has to offer.” Association of Mining and Exploration Companies (Amec) CEO Warren Pearce said he was looking forward to seeing a clear plan around infrastructure and emerging projects. “A strong and productive resource sector is supported by strong environmental governance, and Amec hopes the QRIDP will bring these two elements together to deliver improved development and environmental outcomes for new and existing projects,” Pearce said. “The plan will also help build broader understanding of the resources industry in the wider community by highlighting the benefits and opportunities for all.”