PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Hydrogen technology, specialised batteries are expected to benefit from the government’s A$1.3-billion Modern Manufacturing Initiative (MMI). The MMI will help manufacturers to scale-up production, commercialise their products and operations, and integrate into domestic and global supply chains. Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Christian Porter said the funding would help unlock opportunities for manufacturers in the recycling and clean energy areas. “Turning our waste into valuable products, and expanding our clean energy options are priorities for the government, because it’s good for the environment, it’s good for our economy and it’s good for jobs,” Porter said. “This funding is targeted at businesses who are manufacturing in these areas and will leverage the billions of dollars in other investments being made across government into recycling and clean energy projects.” Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the MMI was an important part of the government’s 'technology not taxes' approach to reducing emissions. “The government is backing Australia’s potential to be a low emissions technology leader. Our support will support the growth of new industries and jobs. “We’re a trusted supplier of energy, commodities and manufactured products across the Indo-Pacific. Getting the technologies of the future right will position us to support our customer countries’ efforts to decarbonise while growing their economies.” Recycling and Clean Energy is the sixth and final of the government’s priority areas to open for funding under the MMI, and investment in the sector will be guided by the Recycling and Clean Energy National Manufacturing Priority road map. The road map highlights specific areas of investment opportunity including: recyclable products and packaging; products made from recycled feedstock such as plastic or organic waste; hydrogen technologies, thermal energy, microgrids, inverters, specialised batteries and low emissions steel and aluminium. The A$1.3-billion MMI is the centrepiece of the government’s A$1.5-billion Modern Manufacturing Strategy - an action plan to position Australia as a globally recognised, high-quality and sustainable manufacturing nation. Initial applications will be limited to the Translation and Integration streams of the MMI, with expressions of interest for the larger Collaboration stream to open soon. Commonwealth funding will be provided on a dollar-for-dollar co-investment basis, with grants ranging from A$1-million to A$20-million.