JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – South Africa’s emerging coal mining changes are poised to present new electricity price risk as the Treasury and Eskom are called upon to consider the softening of uneconomic contractual coal-supply obligations. An example of this is Treasury being asked to authorise Eskom paying more to Seriti Resources for coal than the contractual arrangement with South32 stipulates. Unless Eskom releases South32 from its R280/t coal contract at Duvha power station and agrees to pay Seriti Resources R550/t if it takes over, Seriti will not go ahead with the transaction. South32 and Seriti want the duration cut to four years at R550/t, with Seriti agreeing that Eskom may invite public tenders thereafter, whereas the South32 contract with Eskom has the potential to extend to 2034. In terms of the proposal, it is estimated by a third party that Eskom will be required to pay close to R40-billion more than it would if the contractual arrangement endured for another 14 years, and if Treasury should decide that it is okay to release South32 – which is the ongoing beneficiary of very favourable electricity tariffs at its Hillside Aluminium operation – from the Duvha contract, and allow Seriti to benefit from a higher coal price. This will also be over a far shorter contract duration period of four years. If the Seriti transaction with South32 goes ahead and the Thungela Resources demerging from Anglo American is approved on May 5, major Eskom coal suppliers will continue to include the JSE-listed Exxaro, which has already entered the renewable energy space in parallel with curtailed but still strong coal mining activities, the LSE- and JSE-listed Glencore, which has capped its coal supply and announced that it will deplete its existing coal assets rather than create uncertainty by disposing of them to others, along with companies such as the JSE-listed Wescoal and the unlisted Menar, which has R7-billion worth of coal expansion plans that include low-cost coal offers to Eskom. Anglo American and South32 are both exiting thermal coal to meet important climate change-linked decarbonisation targets. On the need for a higher coal price, Seriti CEO Mike Teke said during a MS Teams interview: “It’s a question of how do we sustain this business.” South32’s coal business, South African Energy Coal (SAEC) employs about 4 500 own employees and 3 500 to 4 000 contractors. South32 COO Mike Fraser revealed to Mining Weekly in an MS Teams interview that the ASX-and JSE-listed company was negotiating a new contract for the payment of electricity it receives from Eskom at Hillside Aluminium, for which Nersa approval was awaited. “In the same way that we’ve now moved on a pricing arrangement at Hillside Aluminium, the coal business, without any movement from Eskom and ourselves, would not provide a solution and you are going to find this business probably failing, because there is no alternative solution to closing the Seriti transaction, apart from potential closure of SAEC, and that would be devastating, not only for Eskom in terms of coal supply, but also for all of the contractors and employees who depend on it,” said Fraser. “The price that we’re asking for the Duvha contract is very much aligned to what Eskom is paying for coal in the market, so we believe that is very aligned to the market and should be reasonable to ensure the sustainability of that business. “Without a solution for Duvha, the entire business is impacted. You couldn’t just close one part of the business without it impacting the entire business,” Fraser said, adding that the company would also be providing $200-million worth of rehabilitation expenditure, $200-million of bank guarantees to support facilities to Seriti, and $50-million worth of restructuring and working capital support. Seriti is also involved in bigger picture negotiations with Eskom: “We are working with Eskom in terms of a package deal to offer them something beyond what is related to Duvha only,” said Teke. Regarding the South32 transaction and what the company was paying for them, Teke said: “We are not paying for these assets. They are paying us to take these assets. The commitment they are making to Eskom in terms of renegotiating their contract is the discussion that has been happening between the two of them." African Source Markets CEO Bevan Jones said in response to Mining Weekly: “I understand that Duvha burns around a 22.50 – 23.00 GJ/mt calorific value coal. If we look at current spot market pricing for this type of material, based purely on export prices, a current price range would be around R550 to R600 per ton, free on truck or rail, in the Witbank area. “However, current export SA coal prices are at an all-time high in rand terms. I very much doubt that this situation will last although of course the market has a way of proving everyone wrong. Thus, I would caution any buyer of entering into a term agreement longer than a year or two, because it is more than likely that coal prices will subside once more over the next couple of years. “This view is based purely on a stand-alone coal contract. I am a market purist and believe contracts should be negotiated on their own merits, not relating them to other premiums or discounts received elsewhere,” Jones stated in an emailed response. Eskom spokesperson Sikonathi Mantshantsha said in response to questions on why Eskom is not holding South32 to its long-term coal supply obligations, or not, in turn, asking to be relieved, of the low-prices Eskom is contracted to ensure at Hillside Aluminium, that Mining Weekly’s questions were not being answered because they dealt with confidential internal information and processes regarding transactions that had not yet been concluded. “Public discussion of these ongoing negotiations regarding proposed transactions is not in the best interests of Eskom. Prematurely making these details of ongoing negotiations public can only be designed to irregularly influence and undermine crucial operational processes. Until finalisation of the due processes, Eskom will not be commenting on this matter,” Mantshantsha added. The National Treasury media team’s emailed response on why it was not enforcing long-term coal supply contracts was that clauses for dispute resolution as well as remedies for non-performance would be included in the contract between Eskom and the service provider. “Therefore Eskom would follow dispute resolution processes according to those clauses, and may include appointment of an independent arbiter. If that process fails then the matter can be referred to court. National Treasury may assist/facilitate an amicable resolution to a dispute. However, a decision to enforce or cancel a contract remains with the Accounting Officer taking into account all relevant factors,” the media team stated.