JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) –  Canadian and Australian mines are big on wanting hydrogen ventilation in deep underground mining operations, and Canada is the likely leader in introducing hydrogen ventilation and green mobility beyond the openpit environment, says Hydrogen South Africa (HySA) Infrastructure Centre director Professor Dmitri Bessarabov of the North-West University and the Centre for Scientific and Industrial Research. Bessarabov, who addressed the South African Institute of Electrical Engineering at a virtual event on hydrogen, showed a picture of himself 3.5 km down a hard-rock mine in Canada, a mining jurisdiction he believes will be the first to adopt emission-free hydrogen ventilation technology underground. “The South African mining sector is also interested and I think Anglo American has taken the right approach in starting with openpit mines first, where the regulations are not as firm. What you do is follow the flammable gas and pressure vessels regulations,” he said in response to Mining Weekly. But there was, he said, still no legislation in place on how hydrogen should be taken underground. “That’s why we built the hydrogen ventilation facility, to show how it can be done,” said Bassarabov, who displayed a picture of the underground hydrogen ventilation facility at HySA Infrastructure’s North West base. Despite South African mines not being likely frontrunners, Bessarabov expressed optimism about local underground hydrogen ventilation being positioned to follow the adoption of hydrogen fuel cell mobility opencast mines, which Anglo American is heading for in the third quarter of this year.. “I think the Canadians will be the first to go underground. But it doesn't matter, the mining sector is very similar across the world,” he said, indicating that other jurisdictions would likely follow going forward. Regarding the adoption of hydrogen fuel cell mobility at mines, he said heavy duty vehicles wanting to go clean and green would have to convert their fuel cell mobility. “That, obviously, would result in the consumption of hydrogen,” he said, adding that the South African mining industry was very well aware of the reality that they would be able to buy fuel cells off the shelf, with no development needed to achieve full fuel cell mobility other than the on-site generation of green hydrogen using solar power and wind power. What was needed was the regulatory framework to outlay how hydrogen should be brought underground and then stored underground for use by mining vehicles. “These are open questions,” he said.