PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Diversified miner Rio Tinto has unveiled a new organizational structure, increasing its focus on operational excellence and project development, and strengthening the company’s environmental, social and governance (ESG) credentials, and rebuilding trust, particularly in Australia. Rio Tinto CEO Jakob Stausholm this week announced the appointment of a permanent CEO of Rio’s iron-ore business, created a COO role, and added a chief executive Australia to his leadership team. Simon Trott, currently chief commercial officer, will become iron-ore CEO, while copper and diamonds CEO Arnaud Soirat will become group COO. Kellie Parker, currently the MD of Pacific Operations aluminium, will join the executive committee (ExCo) as CEO Australia. As COO, Soirat will use his extensive operational experience to drive company-wide improvements in the Rio production system during a fixed 18-month term, while Parker, in her role as CEO of Australia, will focus on rebuilding trust and strengthening external relationships across Australia. In addition to Trott’s appointment, Ivan Vella, currently interim iron-ore CEO, will become aluminium CEO; energy & minerals CEO Bold Baatar will become Copper CEO; and Sinead Kaufman, currently MD operations copper & diamonds, will join ExCo as minerals CEO. “While Rio Tinto continues to deliver strong safety and operational performance, despite the ongoing challenges of Covid-19, there are improvements we can achieve across the business to make Rio more resilient, and an even stronger performer and employer. I want to re-establish Rio as a trusted partner for host communities, governments and other stakeholders,” said Stausholm. “Now the work starts for ExCo, with a full agenda ahead of us and a determination to become a strong team. I am confident that together we can unleash Rio Tinto’s full potential.” Rio will retain four product groups: aluminium, copper, iron-ore and minerals, which will now also include the diamonds business. The product groups will continue to be supported by the safety, technical and projects group, run by Mark Davies, which includes the recently established communities & social performance function. Aluminium CEO Alf Barrios will become chief commercial officer, leading the drive to deliver additional value from mine to market. Vera Kirikova, chief people officer, has decided to leave the company. James Martin, currently a partner at Egon Zehnder, will join Rio as chief people officer with effect from April 6. Peter Toth remains as group executive, strategy and development, including climate change; Barbara Levi remains as chief legal officer & external affairs; and Peter Cunningham continues as interim CFO until the recruitment process for a permanent appointment is finalised.