Government has conveyed its sadness at the death of Peotona Group Holdings co-founder and executive director Dolly Mokgatle. She was an established business leader who held various leadership positions within several of South Africa’s State-owned enterprises and the private sector. Mokgatle was well-known for her notable contributions towards the empowerment of women. “This is truly a sad day, as we have lost a leader who recognised the critical importance of gender equity and the empowerment of women. She was a staunch believer in educating and mentoring girls to achieve their dreams,” comments Government Communication and Information System director-general Phumla Williams. Mokgatle also served as Spoornet CEO, and was the first black non-technical woman to be appointed to the position of Eskom Transmission MD. Her wealth of experience in energy-related matters also played a role in her appointment as National Energy Regulator of South Africa deputy chairperson of the board. “Today, as a country, we have lost a great leader, a visionary and someone who was instrumental in steering energy-related matters for the country. We must all continue with her legacy and work to empower women,” adds Williams. Mokgatle was also Bushveld Minerals' independent nonexecutive director and the company has conveyed its condolences and sympathies to her family. Bushveld also expressed its thankfulness for her contribution to the company. She joined Bushveld Minerals in March 2020. Bushveld chairperson Ian Watson says Mokgatle quickly immersed herself in her role on the company’s board and was a delight to work with, providing much insight and advice to not only himself, but also to the broader board. “I was looking forward to a long journey with her and am deeply saddened to hear of her untimely passing.” Bushveld CEO Fortune Mojapelo says in her short time with the company, Mokgatle made a huge contribution to the board, especially in what was a difficult year for everyone. “On behalf of the board, and everyone at Bushveld, I would like to extend my deepest sympathies to her family, friends and colleagues.”