PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Gold major Newcrest Mining has reported an increase in gold production for the December quarter, as its Lihir project, in Papua New Guinea, and its Telfer mine, in Western Australia, delivered strongly. Gold production in the December quarter reached 535 4777 oz, while copper production was reported at 34 557 t, compared with the 503 089 oz of gold and 34 763 t of copper produced in the September quarter. “Our results for the December quarter were underpinned by a strong operational and safety performance together with significant advancements in our growth agenda and sustainability commitments,” said Newcrest MD and CEO Sandeep Biswas. “Newcrest’s quarterly gold production was 6% higher than the prior period reflecting a stronger performance from Lihir and Telfer combined with a reduction in scheduled maintenance events in the quarter. Our world-class Cadia asset continues to break records, reporting its lowest ever quarterly all-in sustaining cost of negative A$6/oz, which equates to an all-in sustaining cost margin of A$1 821/oz on its almost 200 000 oz in the quarter.” The Cadia mine produced 194 088 oz of gold and 26 643 t of copper during the three months to December. Biswas said that at the Lihir operation, Newcrest was on track to release the outcomes of a mine optimisation study in the half-year results, in February. “The continued improvement of the handling and processing of the argillic ores has contributed to an increase in throughput and recovery, and culminated in a 13% increase in gold production in the quarter. “ Gold production at Lihir reached 200 173 oz during the December quarter. Red Chris produced 11 375 oz of gold and 5 471 t of copper, while the Telfer mine contributed 98 855 oz of gold and 2 443 t of copper during the December quarter. “Red Chris and Telfer also achieved new safety records in the quarter, reporting their lowest ever injury rates. This fantastic achievement demonstrates the success of Newcrest’s safety transformation plan and highlights the commitment and dedication of all our people in embedding the safety culture in our workplace.” Biswas noted that the company in December also took a step towards defining the potential of the Havieron project, with the announcement of an initial inferred mineral resource estimate, with the board in January this year approving funding to construct the box cut and exploration decline, along with associated infrastructure. “With work now well underway at the project, we see the potential of achieving commercial production from Havieron within the next three years,” he added.