Canada’s Agnico Eagle and Teck Resources have earned themselves places on the Corporate Knights’ latest index of the world’s most sustainable corporations, garnering recognition as leaders in sustainability on a global stage. With an overall score of 60.6%, Agnico Eagle placed seventy-third and is the top-ranked mining company appearing on the 2021 Global 100 list. In ninety-first place is Teck, with an overall score of 55.6%. This is the third consecutive year that Teck has been named to the Global 100 list. “We are focused on responsibly producing the metals and minerals necessary for the transition to a low-carbon economy and for building a better quality of life for people around the world,” said Teck CEO Don Lyndsay. The selection process for the 2021 list began with an assessment of 8 080 companies – representing more than $1-billion in revenues – evaluating them based on a set of environmental, governance, social and economic key performance indicators, including new social criteria reflected by both the pandemic and the Black Lives Matter movement. “We are extremely proud to be recognised as one of the world’s 100 most sustainable corporations, especially as the top-ranking mining company,” said Agnico Eagle senior VP sustainability, people and culture Carol Plummer. “For over 60 years, Agnico Eagle has worked hard to earn our reputation as a partner of choice within the industry by operating with respect for others, building trust, being reliable and sharing opportunities.” The most sustainable company on the 2021 Global 100 index is French firm Schneider Electric. Over the last 20 years, Schneider Electric has moved away from high-voltage electrical distribution to focus on data centres, decentralised electrical distribution (including off-grid solar storage) and smart solutions to make the world more electric, energy efficient, renewable and digital. Corporate Knights states that Schneider Electric earned the top spot in the ranking because of its strong performance across a range of sustainability criteria. The company earned 70% of its revenue from sustainable solutions, while 73% of its investments are directed toward sustainable solutions. It also performed strongly in areas including racial and gender diversity and resource productivity and safety.