The remaining conditions of a joint venture (JV) and earn-in agreement between Aim- and FSE-listed exploration and development company Bluejay Mining and Rio Tinto Mining and Exploration, for the Enonkoski project have been met. Announced on November 10, 2020, the JV and earn-in agreement has now seen the commencement of a fieldwork programme at the Enonkoski nickel/copper/cobalt/platinum group elements project in Finland. The fieldwork programme has started relogging and reassaying historical diamond drill core at the Geological Survey of Finland’s core archive. It has also completed Tromino data acquisition through two surveys, with the JV partners awaiting data interpretation. A detailed ground magnetic survey is currently being conducted on two near-mine areas – Tevanjoki and Laukunsuo – northwest and southeast of the historical Enonkoski mine that was operated by Outokumpu during 1984 to 1994. The survey is with 20 m line spacing on the Tevanjoki and Laukunsuo target areas not covered by detailed historic ground magnetic data. The main aim of the survey is to enhance the resolution of the existing magnetic data and consequently generate targets to be tested by drilling.
 
Two Tromino trial surveys totalling 83 stations and 50 m station spacing have been completed on the Laukunsuo area in December 2020 and January 2021. The data is currently being interpreted and the aim of the study is to identify the thickness of overburden cover in the project area and understand if the overburden depths received from the Tromino surveys are comparable with the data from the historic drilling in the area. This will help in determining the best Tromino acquisition recording time and production rate to complete a passive seismic survey over a larger survey block on the Enonkoski belt if the results from the completed surveys are favourable. According to the JV partners, all exploration activities are being conducted with strict Covid-19 protocols in place. Bluejay’s 100%-owned Finnish subsidiary FinnAust Mining Finland COO Thomas Levin says that much of the due diligence work was completed prior to signing of the JV. “The Enonkoski belt has remained significantly underexplored although it hosts two historical nickel/copper/cobalt mines that were in operation in the 1980s and early 1990s,” he says, adding that FinnAust has acquired most of the historical data from the belt and new ground and airborne geophysical surveys have been conducted. Levin notes that diamond drilling conducted by FinnAust less than 1.5 km southeast of the closed Enonkoski mine intersected a nickel/copper mineralisation at shallow depth proving that also the near-mine areas are underexplored.