LSE-listed copper, gold and silver miner Pembridge Resources has appointed a new president, Christopher Stewart, and interim CFO, Jack Cartmel, for its exploration division, Minto Explorations. The decision was made to bring in-house all the senior management positions in line with the termination of the operator agreement at the end of 2020. Stewart is tasked to continue building on the operational efficiency of Minto, together with achieving challenging production and development targets, while Cartmel is tasked to continue strengthening the financial management function at Minto as he has been doing as part of the operator during the past 12 months. Stewart – who is a seasoned mining engineer with over 27 years of experience in the metals mining sector, having worked at McEwen Mining, Kirkland Lake Gold, Liberty Mines and BHP Billiton – will fill the role of president as of January 13. He is a licensed professional engineer in Ontario, Canada and holds a bachelor’s degree in mining engineering from Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario. Pembridge joint advisory committee (JAC) appointed chartered accountant Cartmel to the position of interim CFO, having been part of the management team working for Minto Management that was engaged as operator by Minto under an agreement signed in early 2020. Cartmel has over 15 years of experience in the mining industry with expertise in mergers and acquisitions, securities offerings, public company accounting and disclosure, and financial and risk management. Prior to his industry experience, Cartmel worked as a senior auditor for BDO Canada for five years in the public mining sector. He holds a BBA as well as CPA, CA from the Chartered Professional Accountants of British Columbia. “Pembridge’s board and JAC welcome both Stewart and Cartmel to Minto to manage driving the business forward together with the existing management team of Minto,” the company states. Pembridge CEO and chairperson Gati Al-Jebouri says the appointments are the next steps in ensuring the company has a strong management team capable of executing all the tasks necessary to ensure the full value of Minto is realised. “The appointments come at a time when the Covid-19 challenges have not fully subsided, however, it is clear that we must look forward to ensuring that Minto increases production rates and extracts maximum value during the period of higher copper prices, though higher efficiency of our operations and finances. I wish both Stewart and Cartmel all the success in their roles.”