Aim-listed Cora Gold has recorded further drill results on the Dako II permit, which is contiguous with its flagship Sanankoro gold project, and the Tagan permit adjacent to the north of Aim-listed Hummingbird Resources' Yanfolila mine, in southern Mali. The Dako II drilling builds on the discovery made there last year. The Tagan drilling is the follow-up of a small rotary air blast (RAB) programme drilled in June 2019. Dako II's preliminary results include 9 m at 2.74 g/t gold in hole DC0035; 21 m at 1.48 g/t gold in hole DC0030; and 21 m at 0.75 g/t gold in hole DC0031. The style of mineralisation is similar to Zone A at Sanankoro, being fold and high angle, reverse, thrust faulting within high angle dipping fine grained pelitic and psammitic sediments. About 1 800 m of drilling was completed over 22 holes. A more than 2 km mineralised strike length has now been identified at Dako II. There is more than 3 km of surface mineralisation that remains untested by drilling. There is an ongoing 2 kg bottle roll analysis to elevate the newly discovered mineralised zones to resource quality. Upon completion of Dako II, the rig moved to drill a short RAB-style air core (AC) programme on the Tagan permit at Cora’s Yanfolila North project. The Tagan results include 9 m at 1.23 g/t gold in hole TAC0014; and 24 m at 0.51 g/t gold in hole TAC0015. About 840 m of drilling was completed over 19 holes. There are now multiple parallel more than 1 km mineralised structures identified at the Tagan No 1 prospect as the northwest strike extension of Sanioumale West Shear on the Yanfolila mine permit. "We are delighted to have followed up last year's discovery at Dako II with further promising results.  Seeing the footprint of the Dako II continuing to grow is exciting and having over 3 km of surface mineralisation still to be drilled offers the potential for even more. "Dako II is 7 km south of our resources at Sanankoro and we would hope to see this discovery turn into part of the future resources and mine plan for the project,” comments CEO Bert Monro.