Canada-based Medallion Resources has engaged UK-based life cycle assessment (LCA) provider Minviro to deliver an International Organisation for Standardisation- (ISO-) compliant gate-to-gate LCA model for its proprietary Medallion Monazite Process which extracts rare-earth elements (REE) from mineral sand monazite. Minviro will use data generated from the ongoing techno-economic assessment (TEA) of the Medallion Monazite Process which is anticipated to be delivered during the first quarter of this year. LCA is a widely accepted and robust numerical method used to quantify climate change and other environmental impacts for industrial processes, while identifying opportunities for impact reduction and process improvement, Medallion notes. “Medallion has developed a disruptive and innovative process to deliver REEs with the minimum environmental and carbon footprint. "Seeking the most efficient use of raw materials, energy and reagents is the fundamental basis of our engineering efforts and stands Medallion Monazite Process apart from peers. Our ability to use the best technology at optimal sites provides an attractive opportunity to maximise profitability and minimise environmental impact. We are incorporating this thinking into all of our supply chain conversations and partnerships,” comments Medallion president and CEO Mark Saxon. “REE production has a legacy of social and environmental impacts. As REE demand grows in line with renewable energy and electric vehicle (EV) uptake, it is important that steps are taken to measure and mitigate the environmental impact of producing these essential elements. "Delivery of an LCA is a central part of this process for the battery and EV industries as it provides customers with the necessary data to measure their impact, compare process or supplier scenarios and optimise the environmental performance of projects,” adds Minviro founder and director Dr Robert Pell. The Medallion Monazite Process does not require additional mining to produce REEs, uses a high-grade by-product mineral that typically goes to waste, makes use of process intensification design practice that maximises energy and reagent re-use, and produces zero liquid waste output, enthuses Medallion. Moreover, it notes that climate change and other environmental impact benefits of the process will be quantified by the LCA. “As the Medallion Monazite Process is both scalable and transferable it can be implemented at ideal locations and scales to maximise profitability and minimise the carbon dioxide impact of long-distance feedstock and reagent transport. "REE demand growth is linked to low-carbon emitting technologies, including wind energy and electromobility where efficiency is enabled by high-strength REE permanent magnets. "Many industrial customers in these fields, such as automakers, seek to make the most sustainable purchasing decisions for REEs and battery materials, and the data-driven approach of an LCA with ISO compliance provides them the highest degree of transparency and customer confidence,” the company says. The LCA includes a gate-to-gate life cycle inventory and life cycle impact assessment for five impact categories including carbon footprint, alongside recommended impact mitigation opportunities. The results will be delivered to the company in the form of an ISO-compliant and third-party reviewed life LCA report.