Potash development company Emmerson’s 2020 Sustainability Summary, published on January 28, provides a forward-looking view of the development and construction of its Khemisset potash project, in Morocco, with CEO Graham Clarke saying it will contribute to the overarching agenda of enriching agricultural soils to provide affordable food for the world’s growing population and will have a positive impact on the local area. The company has been analysing the potential impacts on people, local communities and the environment in the different project development workstreams. Emmerson states that the Khemisset potash mine is a project of national significance and is expected to deliver significant direct and indirect benefits to local, regional and national stakeholders. The company commissioned a professor of economics to undertake a socioeconomic impact study, which has confirmed that the project will potentially have a substantial positive impact on the local area. The project is expected to help in meeting the challenge of feeding the ever-increasing population from shrinking arable lands and keeping the roads safe by providing low cost de-icing salt. Other material potential impacts include the creation of 2 800 jobs, including 1 500 direct jobs, during the construction phase; and 1 212 jobs, including 760 direct jobs, during the production phase. The project is expected to increase gross domestic product per capita by 40% at a local level and 0.42% at the national level. The additional tax contributions resulting from the project represent around 176% of the tax revenues generated locally and almost 1% at the national level. Export earnings from the project will contribute an additional 8% to Morocco's mineral export earnings and will have a significant positive effect on the country's balance of payments, says Emmerson. Through these impacts, and with effective policies in place, the study concluded that the project has the potential to directly impact eight of the 17 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals in Morocco. “As a team developing a mining project, it is fundamental that we commit to the highest standards of corporate and social responsibility to produce a sustainable future for all our stakeholders while we deliver the highest value for our shareholders. "We have an ongoing social licence to operate and are committed to keep upgrading our standards as we prepare to build and operate the project. “On a broader level, development of the Khemisset potash project is in line with government efforts to revive the economy in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, and the project aligns well with the strategic plan of making Morocco a hub for the fertiliser industry, primarily in the context of Africa,” says Emmerson in-country manager Lahcen Alloubane. COMPANY POLICIES APPRAISAL In preparation for the definitive design workstreams prior to construction, an appraisal was performed on the company’s policy pack, containing a list of all the corporate policies that will shape the way things are done as a responsible company. A livelihood restoration and resettlement policy has been adopted by the board. This policy outlines the processes and procedures the company will follow in relation to the acquisition of land and the management of any related economic and/or physical displacement. Meanwhile, the environmental- and social-impact assessment (Esia) package was completed in compliance with both Moroccan legislation, as well as the International Finance Corporation performance standards and the Equator Principles. The package consists of the Esia, the environmental and social monitoring programme and the stakeholder engagement programme. Initial baseline investigations undertaken as part of the Esia process identified the presence of two key fauna species in a river adjacent to the project site. These species include the Eurasian Otter and the Brown-Throated Martin. Given the significance of these species both nationally and internationally, the company offered to fund two postgraduate scholarships in partnership with the Rabat Scientific Institute for a 24-month research programme. Although the fauna species are not expected to be impacted on by the proposed mine, the funding has allowed researchers to better understand the ecology, habitat and distribution of these key species in the Khemisset basin. Funding research of this nature highlights the company’s commitment to the broader region, Emmerson states. Further, the initial proposed route for a 15 km 225 kV powerline over the northern area of the project site was changed following the identification of an area of ecological interest along the route. CARBON FOOTPRINT STUDY A carbon footprint study was also completed by the company to compare the expected emissions of the Khemisset project relative to its peers and to identify opportunities for improvement. The results of the study show the project has a relatively low carbon footprint. Key factors identified for reducing greenhouse-gas emissions from the project are maximising the use of electric machinery rather than fuel-driven machinery, and the sourcing of renewable electricity. The company has entered into a memorandum of understanding with an international renewables developer and discussions continue with the objective of finalising a supply contract this year.