Diversified miner Anglo American, financial services provider Absa and automotive manufacturer Ford have contributed a collective R70-million to support government's fight against gender-based violence and femicide.

President Cyril Ramaphosa made the announcement during the virtual launch of the private sector-led, multi-sectoral Gender-Based Violence and Femicide (GBVF) Fund, aimed at supporting the implementation of the National Strategic Plan and the wider GBVF response in South Africa.

“As we launch this fund, I would like to acknowledge and appreciate the contribution by Anglo American of R30-million, the contribution by Absa of R20-million and the contribution just announced by the Ford Foundation of R20-million.
 
“These contributions will make a great difference in the lives of many people. They reflect the true commitment of these valued partners to building a better society. I want to thank the many partners who have come on board to assist us with its establishment, and in particular the International Women’s Forum of South Africa for driving the process," he said.

The President also thanked the companies that have offered their services pro bono to assist with the financial and audit aspects, while acknowledging ENS Africa, PwC, Deloitte and Alexander Forbes for their contribution in making the fund possible. Ramaphosa said that the launch of the fund was a testament to the strength and power of social partnership.

He also noted that gender-responsive trade policies were to be developed as part of the African Continental Free Trade Area agreement and that South Africa has adopted a policy of 40% preferential public procurement for women-owned enterprises and a minimum target of 30% for the region. Meanwhile, Minerals Council South Africa VP and Women in Mining Forum chairperson Nolitha Fakude, who attended the fund's launch event, reiterated the commitment of the council's members to put in place measures to support women in the workplace, prevent abuse of any form and provide the means and support for women to safely report abuse. "We believe that it is our duty to inform, educate and act not only on incidents within our mines, but also beyond our mine gates into our host communities. Both men and women are a vital link in the chain to stop abuse. “We will continue to encourage our members to step up as they have done in the past, to find ways to contribute to this worthy undertaking as we fight this second pandemic successfully as partners,” she said.