Diversified miner Anglo American will make a $30-million contribution towards assisting in the roll-out of Covid-19 vaccines across its operational footprint. The nature of the contribution, consisting of cash and in-kind support, will differ from country to country, based on the vaccine deployment models being adopted by, and the needs of, each country. Anglo’s support is expected to include contributions towards the procurement of vaccines by host governments, as well as logistical support and health and other infrastructure required to facilitate the efficient roll-out of vaccines. CE Mark Cutifani says the company has a long history of supporting major public health programmes to help improve the health of its employees and host communities, as well as running major health facilities around its operations over many decades. “This is [embedded in our] company – it is how we do business. We must help in any way we can.” In South Africa, Anglo will support the national Covid-19 vaccine programme – led by the government – by allocating $10-million, or R150-million, of the company’s global support commitment. This contribution will encompass the purchase of vaccines through South Africa’s Solidarity Fund; logistical support in the form of transportation and storage to help ensure safe and efficient vaccine delivery; the use of Anglo’s operational health facilities and health professionals – in the regions of the Northern Cape, Limpopo, North West and Mpumalanga – to help administer vaccines to the company’s more than 45 000-strong workforce, their families and our host communities; and training community health workers to assist in administering vaccines. Anglo American South Africa chairperson Nolitha Fakude says that by supporting the South African government’s efforts to roll out vaccines at speed and scale, Anglo is contributing to the protection of lives and livelihoods of millions of South Africans. “This is a significant undertaking, which requires business, labour, civil society and government to work together for the benefit of all. We are particularly pleased to be working with the government, the Minerals Council South Africa and Business for South Africa to play a role in this national effort.” Meanwhile, Anglo is working with the authorities in each of the countries where it operates to best assist vaccine roll-out efforts. Through its contributions, Anglo American is committed to the fair and equitable distribution of vaccines. “We recognise that each of our various jurisdictions will have different frameworks for the roll-out of vaccines, and we will support these to the best of our endeavours. The more of us that are vaccinated, the safer we will all be and the more quickly we can help rebuild our economies,” says Cutifani. Anglo has projects and/or offices in Canada, Colombia, Brazil, Peru, Chile, Finland, the UK, Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, Zimbabwe, China, India and Australia.