PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Pure Hydrogen International joint venture (JV) has inked a term sheet with private hydrogen project development company Port Anthony Renewables to build and develop a large-scale hydrogen production facility at Port Anthony, in Victoria. The JV is targeting an initial production of 20 t/d, ASX-listed Pure Energy said on Monday. Pure Energy’s hydrogen division, Pure Hydrogen Corporation, earlier this year formed a JV with Liberty Hydrogen with the aim of developing four large-scale hydrogen hubs on Australia’s east coast, with two to be located in Queensland, one in New South Wales, and one in Victoria. Pure Energy MD Scott Brown on Monday said that the JV was pleased to be partnering with Port Anthony Renewables to build and operate a hydrogen plant that would encompass best-of-breed hydrogen and fuel cell technology. “This is an ideal site for a hydrogen hub with the necessary attributes to cater for both domestic and international markets. This agreement builds on our strategy of cooperating and collaborating with experienced operators to develop a significant hydrogen business capable of servicing a large customer base. “We are making solid progress securing site control at our other three planned hubs, as well as potential new locations, as well as advancing further technology and new customer agreements with further updates pending.” Port Anthony is some 196 km east of Melbourne and has been continually used commercially since 1966 to service the Bass Strait offshore oil and gas field with project cargo, and support services to exploration, construction and production. It is also the only Victorian shipping terminal east of Melbourne that caters for handling dry-bulk cargoes with particular focus on bulk commodities in various forms. Port Anthony Renewables executive chairperson Ben Anthony said the region had a long-established history of supporting Australia’s energy needs and had actively participated in the industry. “The deal with Pure Hydrogen International is yet another opportunity to show Port Anthony can manoeuver itself to continue to provide that service to Australia through a greener way of operating.”