PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian oil and gas sector has reaffirmed its commitment to meeting emissions reduction targets consistent with the objectives of the Paris Agreement, while maintaining affordable, secure energy supplies to consumers and industries that provide jobs and economic growth. Releasing the third edition of its Climate Change Policy Principals, industry body Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) said a key focus was on how climate policy should be cohesive with other energy, international trade, taxation, economic growth and environmental policies, saying that the sector also supported government policies and industry actions to get the economy to net-zero emissions by 2050. Appea CEO Andrew McConville said for more than 15 years, Australia’s oil and gas industry had had a consistent policy on climate change, which endorsed a national policy approach that supported both environmental objectives and industries that provided jobs and economic growth. “The oil and gas industry supports a national climate change policy that delivers greenhouse gas emissions reductions, consistent with the objectives of the Paris Agreement and with net-zero emissions across the Australian economy by 2050 as part of a contribution to a goal of global net-zero emissions by 2050. “Greater use of Australian natural gas, in the domestic market, and liquefied natural gas (LNG) exported globally, can significantly reduce greenhouse-gas emissions both here and abroad,” McConville said. “Natural gas is a lower emitting and cleaner burning fuel than other sources, and it supports renewables and is a key pathway to large-scale hydrogen development. “This sector is fully committed to reducing its own greenhouse-gas emissions and is rapidly advancing low emissions technologies such as carbon capture and storage and hydrogen. Both these technologies have been prioritised in the Australian Government’s Technology Investment Roadmap.” Appea’s Climate Change Principles include four key areas, including a target of net-zero emissions by 2050, recommendations that climate policies should be efficient, enduring and integrated with economic, social, technology and energy policies, and that Australia’ international competitiveness should be enhanced through this policy. The Principles also recommend universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy. McConville said a number of oil and gas producers in Australia and around the world were embracing net-zero emissions targets as an important step forward. “This is a positive demonstration of the key role the industry can play in a cleaner energy future. It’s encouraging to see the entire industry is moving in the same direction by producing a lower emission energy source and taking action to reduce their own emissions. “Reducing global emissions is a global effort, and as an energy exporter, Australia is doing its part through many channels.”