Platinum-group metals (PGMs) producer Impala Platinum (Implats) says it has received an A rating for its water disclosure submission to global voluntary disclosure nonprofit organisation CDP for the 2020 CDP Water Disclosure Project. The rating, which also marks the second consecutive year Implats has achieved this score, places it in the leadership band with a select group of only 106 companies for achieving best practice in their 2020 disclosure, awareness and management of water security risk. Implats scored well in eight of the 11 categories measured by CDP, namely its risk assessment, risk exposure and responses, business strategy, governance, its integrated approach to environmental challenges, its targets and goals, as well as water-related opportunities. “We are delighted to again be recognised by the CDP for our water disclosure. We worked hard on the management of this precious resource and are pleased this has been recognised by our high ranking relative to the sector and our peers," says Implats CEO Nico Muller. "Our strategy focuses on water consumption and quality management and we have a framework for operation-specific water conservation strategies, in line with our commitment to reduce our levels of potable water used and increase our use of recycled water. We continue to adapt and refine our knowledge around climate-related physical risks and regularly review our climate-related performance targets.” Implats' rating is higher than the B average achieved by the metal smelting, refining and forming sector, as well as the Africa regional average of B. The score also puts Implats in the top 15% of companies in the leadership band in terms of disclosure, the company adds. The CDP Water Disclosure Project score encourages companies to progress their environmental stewardship practices through benchmarking and comparison with peers to continuously improve water governance. CDP data also provides insight for investors and other influential decision-makers on how to reduce risk, capitalise on opportunities and drive action towards a more sustainable world. “Water is a critical input for mining operations and a resource which is shared with mine-host communities. For Implats’ operations in South Africa and Zimbabwe particularly, water management is critical as these are water scarce areas. Our operations implement initiatives to ensure water use is effectively monitored, and we aim to progressively reduce our use of this scarce resource,” concludes Muller.