Private company Inzuvect, trading as LNR Forest Estate, has partnered with forestry expert Merensky Timber to research ecosystem restoration on mining properties within the Royal Bafokeng Nation's (RBN's) landholdings. RBN is a traditionally governed community of about 150 000 people living in 29 villages and owning 1 200 km2 of land in the North West province. RBN’s shareholdings include a 13% stake in Impala Platinum and a majority shareholding in Royal Bafokeng Platinum. LNR will, from the first week of March and over the next decade research and, in due course, implement solutions to ensure sustainable livelihoods and biodiversity in post-mining economies. The company is responding to the global call of managing biodiversity, climate change, food security and livelihoods, in accordance with the United Nation’s Wildlife theme for 2021 – “Forestry and Livelihoods” and Sustainable Development Goals 2, 13 and 15, relating to food security, health, land degradation and climate change. Rehabilitated mining land can serve as carbon catchment areas, with restored biodiversity and perhaps even sources of fresh water with the correct restoration practices, explains project coordinator and LNR lead researcher Lindiwe Ringane. The project will integrate mining, conservation and biodiversity, towards creating a realistic green sustainable economy that will be meaningful to mining communities beyond 2035. “The project seeks to restore tree and vegetation growth around mining sites situated entirely within village settings. The aim is to stabilise tailings to prevent runoff of toxic materials into streams, and reduce the volumes of water seepage through acidic and heavy metal contaminated material and, importantly, mitigate climate change. LNR aims to improve water quality in these post-mining-economy areas, as well as soil quality for future agricultural activities. The company will address the needs of the soil and prepare for the kind of future that is necessary and more environment-friendly in the region. Ringane tells Engineering News & Mining Weekly that LNR will look to first start its research and implementation in one area, or near one mine, and find out what the community objectives are for the land post mining. LNR has engaged with the Montana Technology University, in the US, specifically Professor Paul Conrad and Professor Scott Rosenthal, considering the research they have conducted on mining rehabilitation and preparing land for an entire ecosystem – incorporating conservation, preservation, restoration and other environment responsible activities. Ringane believes climate change should not only be discussed, but says there must be activities and implementation for mitigation. “Before we can talk about advanced technology, we need to understand what happens in the real sense of nature.” She adds that LNR and RBN will duplicate biodiversity restoration successes from their initial trial area to other RBN sites to build more carbon capture sites and secure more clean water resources. Ringane confirms that RBN is still evaluating an initial site before research will start. She believes LNR resonates with RBN on its Vision 2035 strategy, which speaks to sustainable land restoration beyond mining. Ringane points out that in-itself, restoring biodiversity, presents opportunity for forestry activity, such as wood lots that are managed responsibly, which would also help to re-establish an economy in mining communities, or for renewable energy plants, agriculture and tourism, if original indigenous plants can be restored in the area. She says land degradation neutrality will enable the sustainable provision of renewable energy, which will, in turn, contribute to the green economy of South Africa. Essentially LNR aims for its work to become a catalyst for mining rehabilitation and ecosystem restoration, while making sense for the mining economy to engage in these activities. “Let us integrate conservationists and engineers and start actioning solutions,” she concludes.