PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The first sod has been turned at Queensland’s A$20-million Hydrogen Training Centre of Excellence at Beenleigh. Treasurer Cameron Dick said the new facility was a key part of the government’s plan to fast-track the development of the industry and ensure Queensland is at the forefront as the supplier of choice for hydrogen. “Our Queensland Hydrogen Industry Strategy 2019 - 2024 is focussed on developing the hydrogen industry to create jobs and is a vital part of our plan to Unite and Recover for Queensland Jobs,” the Treasurer said. “By 2030, it is estimated the Queensland hydrogen industry could be worth about A$1.7-billion a year in exports, providing jobs throughout the state. “Investing in state-of-the-art training facilities will attract new workers to the industry as well as meet projected demand from existing apprentices and tradespeople.” Minister for Energy, Renewables and Hydrogen Mick de Brenni said this initiative, one of four training centres worth more than A$50-million, would skill up a hydrogen workforce enabling the state’s future economic development. “Queensland’s opportunity to grow jobs in manufacturing and resources needs cheaper, cleaner energy, and the future demand for hydrogen is being met as the government is ensuring Queenslanders have the skills to deliver it,” he said. “Already, Queensland’s renewables industry is worth A$8.5-billion, and with our abundance of solar and wind capacity, Queensland is the ideal candidate to produce hydrogen for domestic and international use.” Minister for Training and Skills Development Di Farmer said the A$20-million centre is an investment in the skills and jobs of the future. “We need trainees and apprentices to start developing these skills now, so that they are ready to go when these jobs come on line. That’s why we are investing now, to deliver the skilled workforce we will need in the future. “We are working in partnership with the industry not-for-profit organisation, Plumbing Industry Climate Action Centre (PICAC), to build the new facility at the existing training centre by June 2022. “It will expand training capacity from 600 to 800 apprenticeships per year to train apprentices in fire protection, gas plumbing, carpentry, electrical and plumbing skills. “The new world-class training facilities will include gas training equipment, lower carbon technology upgrades, roof-access work platforms, special hazards fire systems and state-of-the-art training rooms.” The project is expected to employ 70 apprentices during construction and support a total of 100 jobs. “Our hydrogen training investment also includes A$10.6-million for a hydrogen and renewable energy training facility at Bohle TAFE campus in Townsville, A$2-million to upgrade training facilities at Gladstone State High School to prepare students for jobs in the hydrogen industry and a A$17-million grant will allow Electro Group Training to deliver renewable energy skills and training,” Farmer said.