JSE-listed diversified miner Exxaro Resources says it has implemented community support initiatives to aid host communities around its Grootegeluk mine, in Lephalale, Limpopo, to help them overcome socioeconomic challenges they face as a result of the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. Exxaro Grootegeluk Complex GM Ronaldt Mafoko says collaboration and support are key to effectively overcoming Covid-19. “As the economic heartbeat for so many of the communities in which we operate, Exxaro invests in the people it serves. We sought out sustainable collaboration opportunities in Lephalale to help give back to the community, particularly by recognising the socioeconomic challenges they face and stepping in to help.” The Grootegeluk mine donated 100 food parcels to the Lephalale local municipality’s Festive Season campaign in support of child-headed families, women, and the disabled in the community, and also donated ten two-fold beds to the Ellisras Hospital to assist with the rise in Covid-19 patient intake. "These contributions help to support the Lephalale community by addressing the most urgent needs first, through food support and helping to ensure that community members can receive medical attention at hospitals. The mine's response to the effects of Covid-19 is tailored to the specific and most urgent needs of the Lephalale community, recognising the socioeconomic environment of the town," Mafoko says. Businesses and government have an active role to play in support of the community. They can also go a long way in ensuring the health and safety of their employees, customers, clients, service providers and other stakeholders, he adds. Exxaro has also invested R7-million in private testing laboratories in Limpopo and Mpumalanga to allow for the testing of its employees. It then extended their use to Seriti Coal Operations and Eskom's operations in Lephalale to test their employees, ensuring accessible access to Covid-19 testing facilities and helping curb the spread of the virus. “Whether it is collaboration between companies, or collaboration between companies and government, finding ways to work together will improve outcomes for everyone. Now is the time to combine strengths so that we can overcome our collective weaknesses."