In a move to reinforce its commitment to Idaho, Toronto-listed Midas Gold has changed its name to Perpetua Resources and announced that it will begin trading on the Nasdaq this week. As the Stibnite gold project continues to advance through major milestones, the listing on a US stock exchange is a strategic decision to focus the company's business in the US and open additional opportunities for American investment. "Today's approval to list on the Nasdaq points to our growth and readiness to enter the next chapter of bringing the Stibnite gold project vision to life," said president and CEO Laurel Sayer. Sayer succeeded Stephen Quin at the end of last year as part of a board and management shakeup to appease shareholder Paulson & Co, who had pushed for US representation on the board and to move Midas to a US listing. "The Nasdaq is a premier electronic exchange. Our listing here will allow us greater access to capital, which will help our team move the Stibnite gold project from permitting into production. We look forward to connecting with new investors, while delivering value to our long-term shareholders who have supported our vision for years,” said Sayer. The new name, Perpetua Resources, is inspired by Idaho's motto, Esto Perpetua, translated to mean "let it be perpetual", and is a reflection of the company's commitment to doing its part to protect the state of Idaho's vast resources for generations to come. "We have always been more than a gold mining company, but you wouldn't have known it by our name," said Sayer. "The name Perpetua Resources better reflects our plan to restore an abandoned mining site, to responsibly develop the critical resources our country needs for a more secure and sustainable future and to be guided by a commitment to Idaho's resources and people. We are proud to enter our next chapter with a name that helps communicate our values and the sustainable future we are working to create for all of us." The company also recently relocated its corporate headquarters to Boise, Idaho, and has added to its team. Jessica Largent has been appointed VP of investor relations and finance. Largent has held finance leadership roles at Newmont, Turquoise Hill Resources and Rio Tinto and brings more than 15 years of mining industry experience in investor relations, planning, financial reporting and accounting to Perpetua Resources. Largent comes to the company after serving as the VP of investor relations for Newmont. The company has also promoted long-time Idaho employee Tanya Nelson from human resources manager and corporate secretary to the Midas Gold Idaho board to VP of human resources and corporate strategy of Perpetua Resources. Nelson is also an Idaho native and has lived in Valley county, where the project is located, since 1998.