PERTH (miningweekly.com) – A renewable hydrogen trial is set to launch in Tennant Creek, in the Northern Territory, between joint venture (JV) partners Axcentium and Ahurei. The JV partners will be trialing a new technology, called Aqua Aerem, to capture water from the atmosphere in arid environments in an off-grid hydrogen project. The Aqua Aerem technology provides an innovative approach to secure a sustainable water supply, which is an essential in the development of renewable hydrogen and will be particularly valuable in arid areas. The trial will be located in Tennant Creek for 12 weeks to collect local production data for further optimisation of the water capture process. Minister for Renewables and Energy Eva Lawler said this week that the territory government supports trials of hydrogen technology and is keen to champion renewable hydrogen investment as part of the Territory’s transition to renewables. “In 2020, the Northern Territory government launched the territory’s first ever Renewable Hydrogen Strategy, bringing the Northern Territory to the forefront of the developing renewable hydrogen industry with large areas of land with high solar irradiance, close proximity to export markets.” The government’s Renewable Hydrogen Strategy outlines the territory’s competitive advantages and how the Territory will leverage these advantages to be a centre of hydrogen technology research, production and use in Australia. Water is a precious resource and a sustainable water source is critical to development of renewable hydrogen projects in the territory. Lawler said that this technology provides an innovative solution for securing a sustainable water source for the production of renewable hydrogen in Tennant Creek. “As renewable hydrogen technologies are continuously evolving, having innovative trials like this one in the Territory will be essential to ensure the Territory remains at the forefront of the renewable hydrogen industry,” she added. “The Aqua Aerem renewable hydrogen project supports the Territory government’s vision to achieve zero net emissions by 2050. We are building a strong and diverse economy and there are significant opportunities for clean energy production and use.” This trial is the first stage of a pilot renewable hydrogen project that will ultimately produce renewable hydrogen for Territory Generation’s Tennant Creek power station to generate green energy as part of the electricity mix for the Tennant Creek community. Tennant Creek’s high solar irradiance makes it an excellent location for renewable hydrogen production.