PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) will undertake a A$5-million hydrogen research, development and demonstration (RD&D) international collaboration programme. The programme is aimed at strengthening research connections, collaboration and knowledge sharing between Australian research institutions and leading international hydrogen research organisations. Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the programme will help promote strong relationships with research agencies in partner countries to accelerate the development of a global clean hydrogen industry. “The Morrison government is positioning Australia to be a world leader in the production of clean hydrogen as well as a trusted and reliable exporter to our trading partners,” Taylor said. “Investing in R&D and building connections with international partners are critical to Australia building and growing our own globally competitive industry. We recognise the important economic and job opportunities becoming a major global hydrogen player will deliver, while also lowering emissions.” Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Christian Porter said the programme would build domestic capability, drive innovation, and play to Australia’s strengths in hydrogen research and commercialisation. “This investment in international research collaboration will deliver a range of insights and outcomes, enhance Australia’s international reputation for excellence in science and innovation, and translate research activities into viable technologies with tangible commercialisation outcomes,” Porter said. “This programme will also improve our understanding of future hydrogen supply chains and markets, and help us to harness the potential for an Australian clean hydrogen industry to grow our economy and create Australian jobs.” The programme will build on and intensify recent collaborative efforts between the Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources and CSIRO in developing an ‘Australian Hydrogen Researcher Network’, established to better connect Australia’s hydrogen research community with each other and the new international programme. Proposed programme activities include supporting researcher exchanges, developing collaboration tools and events and enabling sharing of knowledge about research relevant to hydrogen and its derivatives, such as ammonia. Hydrogen is a key priority under the government’s Technology Investment Roadmap, and the Australian government has invested more than A$1-billion to support Australia’s clean hydrogen industry. The government has also entered into partnerships with Germany, Singapore and Japan to accelerate the development of low emissions technologies, including hydrogen, which will drive investment and job creation in Australia.