PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The resources sector has welcomed a Western Australian Parliamentary Inquiry into sexual harassment against women in the fly-in, fly-out (FIFO) industry. The Inquiry, established on Wednesday, would inquire into the prevalence of sexual harassment in the FIFO mining industry, and would look at whether appropriate measures exist to combat the occurrence of sexual harassment, as well as the extent of current legislation, regulations, policies and practices for the FIFO workplace in Western Australia. The Western Australian Chamber of Minerals and Energy (CME) said on Wednesday that ensuring the health and safety of workers in the sector was the ‘utmost priority’ for the industry body and its members. “As I’ve said previously, any instances of rape, sexual assault and sexual harassment are totally unacceptable” CME CEO Paul Everingham said. “We apologise to anyone who has experienced this type of behaviour in our sector. To all of those who have come forward to report it, we thank you for your bravery, and to those who previously haven’t felt safe or supported enough to come forward, please know that we are committed to providing an environment in which you feel safe to do so.” Everingham said Western Australia’s resources sector would take on board any recommendations that may arise from the Inquiry. “We look at this Inquiry as an opportunity to improve what we do. We are committed to eliminating any instance of these behaviours in our workforce. Our industry has long been recognised for our leading risk management capabilities and ability to respond rapidly to health and safety risks. We are working rapidly to apply these skills and expertise to ensure a swift and effective response and protect the safety of our people. “To have fresh eyes from outside the sector look at how we manage our workforce and its safety is a healthy thing. Recommendations for change that are practical and which would achieve positive outcomes are certainly ones we would act upon,” he said. Everingham said CME and its member companies would also continue their own efforts to implement changes in parallel to the inquiry. This will include activities through CME’s Safe and Respectful Behaviors Working Group involving senior work, health and safety and diversity and inclusion representatives from a range of member companies. Meanwhile, the Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) has released a National Industry Code, which sets clear expectations on MCA member companies to develop a culture of respect while improving support for workers. MCA CEO Tania Constable said that the Industry Code reinforces the industry’s commitment to eliminating sexual harassment by outlining clear preventative and response measures based on honest, respectful and open communication. MCA member companies will be required to confirm their commitment to eliminating sexual harassment and adopting the Industry Code and encouraged to include the commitment and code on their websites and intranet sites. “Sexual harassment causes profound physical, emotional and psychological impacts on those affected. It is unacceptable, against the law and must be eliminated from our industry’s culture and workplaces,” Constable said. “The Industry Code establishes clear expectations on companies in developing a culture of respect that empowers individuals to raise concerns in a supportive and protected way. “A uniform national approach enables all employers and workers to have the same expectations for respectful workplaces regardless of their location, job, gender or seniority. “Prevention measures focus on culture and governance, awareness and education, leadership and working environments. Response measures focus on creating an environment where raising concerns and reporting incidents is welcomed and encouraged, providing appropriate support and protection to affected persons, understanding how an incident occurred and why prevention measures in place were not effective and how they may be strengthened,” she added.