PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian Gas Infrastructure Group (AGIG) on Wednesday formally opened its A$14.5-million hydrogen production facility Hydrogen Park South Australia (HyP SA) and has started blending renewable hydrogen into part of its natural gas distribution network in Adelaide, South Australia. At HyP SA, a proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolyser uses renewable electricity to split water into hydrogen and oxygen. AGIG, through its subsidary Australian Gas Network (AGN) will blend approximately 5% renewable hydrogen into its existing natural gas distribution network to deliver a blended gas to more than 700 homes in parts of the Adelaide suburb of Mitchell Park. 

AGN received a A$4.9-million grant from the South Australian government’s Renewable Technology Fund to build and operate the project. “With our abundant renewable energy resources South Australia is well placed to become a world-class producer, supplier and exporter of green hydrogen and projects such as HyP SA are key to demonstrating our leadership in this exciting industry,” Minister for Energy and Mining Dan van Holst Pellekaan said.

“The installation of Australia’s largest hydrogen electrolyser further advances the government’s plans to deliver cleaner, more affordable energy to South Australian households and businesses. 

“Hydrogen is a fuel with tremendous potential and the government is getting in on the ground floor to ensure we can service local, national and international demand for zero carbon hydrogen.” 

AGIG CEO Ben Wilson said the successful completion of HyP SA was an important milestone in South Australia’s renewable gas journey and reflected widening community recognition of hydrogen’s significant benefits. 

"HyP SA is an Australian first and one of only a few projects in the world to deliver a renewable gas blend to homes connected to an existing gas network," Wilson said. 

"The hydrogen produced at HyP SA shows how we can use the state’s abundant solar and wind resources to deliver carbon-free gas to homes and businesses. HyP SA demonstrates the low carbon future of the gas industry and illustrates the important role the nation’s gas networks will play in meeting the decarbonisation challenge.” 

"At AGIG, we are investing in the long-term interests of our customers and the environment, with HyP SA providing the template for the conversion of our entire gas network to safely and efficiently distribute renewable hydrogen to our customers. We are now focused on developing plans to deliver a complete carbon-free gas supply for our customers.” 

The HyP SA facility also includes tube trailer refilling infrastructure to supply renewable hydrogen to industry across South Australia via road transport with project partner BOC.

HyP SA is capable of producing approximately 175 t/y of hydrogen, equal to the total gas use of around 1 500 South Australian homes, or tens of thousands of homes on a blended gas basis. 

HyP SA is also the first of several renewable hydrogen projects AGIG is developing around Australia. 

AGIG has announced plans for a similar plant in Gladstone, Queensland; is developing detailed plans to blend between 10% and 100% renewable hydrogen into gas networks in both South Australia and Victoria through the Australian Hydrogen Centre; and is assessing how hydrogen can be introduced into the Dampier to Bunbury natural gas transmission pipeline in Western Australia. 

Additionally, the Australian Renewable Energy Agency recently awarded two AGIG projects funding as part of the Renewable Hydrogen Deployment Funding Round. Hydrogen Park Murray Valley, in Victoria and the Clean Energy Innovation Park, in Western Australia are both 10 MW projects that will look to blend into gas distribution networks as well as supply industry and transport.