The Kamoa-Kakula mine, in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), has started producing copper, joint venture (JV) partners Ivanhoe Mines and Zijin Mining reported on Wednesday. Production at the Phase 1, 3.8-million-tonne-a-year mine was achieved several months ahead of schedule. Co-chair Robert Friedland described first production from Kamoa-Kakula as an “historic moment” for Ivanhoe and the DRC, while President Felix Tshisekedi said it indicated that the country was open for business and investment. "Discovering and delivering a copper province of this scale, grade and outstanding ESG credentials, ahead of schedule and on budget, is a unicorn in the copper mining business. This accomplishment reflects the outstanding cooperation of thousands of individuals, and all of our joint venture partners at Kamoa-Kakula. "Although this exploration journey started well over two decades ago, it also is noteworthy that the Kakula deposit itself was discovered a little over five years ago, which is remarkable progress by the mining industry's glacial standards from first drill hole to a new major mining operation. "The initiation of production puts us on the path to establish Kamoa-Kakula as the second largest, and perhaps eventually the largest, copper mining complex in the world. What really excites our geologists is the profound potential to find additional Kamoa-Kakula-like copper discoveries on our massive Western Foreland exploration licences right next door, in an identical geologic setting,” said Friedland. Ivanhoe said it would provide an update on Phase 1 copper concentrate offtake arrangements in the near term. In April, the Kakula mine mined 357 000 t of ore grading 5.70% copper, including 121 000 t grading 8.40% copper from the mine's high-grade centre. The company will update May's production in early June, and will continue with its practice of monthly progress updates. Kakula is projected to be the world's highest-grade major copper mine, with an initial mining rate of 3.8-million tonnes a year, ramping up to 7.6-million tonnes a year in the third quarter of 2022. Phase 1 is expected to produce 200 000 t/y of copper, and phases 1 and 2 combined are forecast to produce about 400 000 t/y. The phased expansion scenario to 19-million tonnes a year would position Kamoa-Kakula as the world's second-largest copper mining complex, with annual copper production of more than 800 000 t/y. Given the current copper price environment, Ivanhoe and Zijin are exploring the acceleration of the Kamoa-Kakula Phase 3 concentrator expansion from 7.6-million tonnes a year to 11.4-milllion tonnes a year, which may be fed from expanded mining operations at Kansoko, or new mining areas at Kamoa North (including the Bonanza zone) and Kakula West.