PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Western Australian government this week unveiled A$1.5-million in funding to accelerate net zero emissions mining in the state. Mines and Petroleum Minister Bill Johnston says that up to A$1.5-million will be invested in funding research and development in Western Australia's energy and emissions intensive mining sector under the Minerals Research Institute of Western Australia's (MRIWA) Net Zero Emission Mining Challenge. A A$1-million competitive funding round opened earlier this week to co-fund research proposals that address challenges to reducing emissions in the mining industry. Additionally, expressions of interest opened for small- to medium-sized businesses in the mining, equipment, technology and services (METS) sector to participate in Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation's (CSIRO’s) Innovate to Grow online programme. The free 10-week programme will commence in July and help METS leaders develop innovative solutions to business challenges related to net zero emissions mining in Western Australia. “The government is committed to supporting research and development in Western Australia's mining sector and ensuring it remains a world leader in the METS sector,” said Johnston. "The funding announcement will support the diversification of our State's economy, and progress research on overcoming the challenges to decarbonise the mining sector. "METS are a vital part of the resources sector supply chain, and I encourage all eligible small businesses to apply and play a role in the government's commitment of net zero emissions by 2050." The state government, through MRIWA, is offering A$500 000 in A$20 000 to A$50 000 grants to eligible programme participants to develop their solutions. These grants require matched funding and will be subject to an application process after the programme's completion. Applications for CSIRO's Innovate to Grow programme close on June 28, 2021 and applications for the A$1-million competitive funding round close on July 7.