TSX-V-listed Diamcor Mining is proceeding with the expansion of processing facilities at its Krone-Endora at Venetia project, in South Africa. The miner originally targeted the expansion for 2020; however, owing to the Covid-19 pandemic and associated public health restrictions implemented in South Africa, those plans were intentionally delayed to lower expenses and capital expenditures during that time. Diamcor COO Dr Kurt Petersen on May 27 outlined a strategy based on an extensive ongoing evaluation of the project’s heavy equipment fleet, operations, processing plants, final recovery systems, mineral resource management and rehabilitation commitments. The expansion is targeted to take place in two phases, with the first aimed at doubling the current processing volumes in the near term, and the second aimed at finalising the project’s mining and processing scheme to significantly enhance long-term processing volume capabilities as part of the company’s overall long-term mineral project management strategy. These plans are not expected to affect the processing efforts that are currently under way, the miner said in a statement, noting that the initial phase will consist of a new final X-ray recovery process aimed at increasing diamond recovery efficiencies, and additional processing equipment to improve bulk materials reduction. Planned completion for this initial phase is prior to the end of the company’s second quarter ending September 30. A second, larger phase will focus on completing the groundwork necessary for future expansion capabilities. Diamcor plans to consolidate its current facilities to further increase throughputs, reduce the overall processing footprint and unit costs, and minimize environmental disturbance. Additional heavy equipment will also be added if required to support these objectives. This overall strategy will be supported by the parallel activities of drilling and bulk sampling of prospective target areas of the project, which is scheduled to start before the end of this year.