Toronto-listed Sherritt International on Tuesday announced the appointment of Leon Binedell, a 25-year mining industry veteran, as president and CEO with effect from June 1. Originally from South Africa, Binedell most recently worked as CFO of Guyana Goldfields. “In searching for our new chief executive, the board was mindful of the need to recruit a candidate with the strategic capability to drive Sherritt’s future agenda whilst at the same time possessing a thorough understanding of mining,” said chairperson Sir Richard Lapthorne. “I am delighted with Leon’s appointment. He is a dedicated leader whose deep sector expertise and proven ability to deliver results in complex stakeholder and multi-jurisdictional landscapes will be great advantages for Sherritt for many years to come. His proactivity, high ethics, strategic mindset and dependability make him a true asset, and we are confident in Sherritt’s ability to create significant value under his leadership.” Binedell has served in a variety of senior leadership roles at leading mining companies, including nickel and other base metals businesses. Prior to joining Goldfields, he served as finance operating executive with Resource Capital Funds, a leading private equity fund focused on the mining sector and the commercialiation of mining innovation. In his role, he advised a portfolio of 25 companies representing $2-billion in assets under management that spanned seven commodities and mining related innovations across eight countries on improving their overall strategies, financial performance and finance practices. Additional sector experience includes his time at PricewaterhouseCoopers, Xstrata Nickel (now Glencore) and at Koniambo Nickel. “I am excited to be joining Sherritt at this important juncture in its ongoing transformation as the company continues to capitalize on growing demand for high-purity nickel and cobalt, while also expanding its Technologies business,” said Binedell. “Sherritt’s exposure to the electric vehicle revolution and unique ability to deliver crucial hydrometallurgy technology illustrates that the business has a compelling future. I look forward to building on the nearly 100 years of Sherritt’s history in innovation and to delivering long-term value for our shareholders while continuing our focus on safe, environmentally conscious operations for the benefit of our employees and various stakeholders.” Binedell will succeed current president and CEO David Pathe, who in November 2020 announced his intention to step down from the role in 2021.