PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Queensland has flagged the creation of two additional hydrogen clusters in Gladstone and Toowoomba, building on a A$100 000 commitment from the state government through a partnership with National Energy Resources Australia (NERA) to establish the new clusters which will now work alongside the already established H2Q cluster in Brisbane. Minister for Energy, Renewables and Hydrogen Mick de Brenni said the Queensland government’s funding will provide Gladstone Engineering Alliance (GEA) and Toowoomba and Surat Basin Enterprise (TSBE) with A$50 000 each to progress their cluster strategies. “Backing clusters in Gladstone and Toowoomba will drive the development of Queensland’s hydrogen supply chain in a way that delivers jobs for regional Queenslanders in areas like components and materials manufacturing for this new technology,” De Brenni said. “With our Hydrogen Industry Strategy and the support of NERA, the conversation has very much shifted from “if” to “when” commercially viable domestic and export-scale renewable hydrogen becomes a reality here in Queensland. “If we can position Queensland as the hydrogen technology leader, innovator and exporter of this resource, we will well and truly cement out position as a renewable energy superpower," said De Brenni. “Queensland’s existing hydrogen cluster, H2Q, has already developed a detailed market analysis plan and is engaging with local businesses to develop new hydrogen technologies.” The two new clusters join the Hydrogen Technology Cluster Australia (H2TCA) which is the overarching industry-led cluster that would expedite rapid development of the hydrogen supply chain and drive market activation, as well as a national network of 13 clusters announced in February this year. Spearheaded by NERA, H2TCA is working to establish a global identity and a recognised brand for Australian hydrogen technology and expertise. It is also aiding the development of the hydrogen supply chain, reducing overlaps and identifying gaps in the development, deployment, and commercialisation of new hydrogen-focused technologies. NERA CEO Miranda Taylor said the announcement of an additional two clusters in Queensland shows the importance the state places on the potential for hydrogen energy. “Today is yet another step along the road and a further indication of Australia’s capability in developing hydrogen technologies. These two new Queensland clusters will be able to work together with the existing H2Q cluster in Brisbane, as well as the other regional clusters in H2TCA, to ensure long-term local cohesion and sustainable capability across the emerging hydrogen value chain. Australia wants to be exporting more than just molecules," said Taylor. “Today’s announcement is a crucial step for Queensland in building the skills, capacities and commercialisation opportunities necessary to unlock Australia’s enormous potential to create a globally competitive hydrogen industry that, according to a 2019 Deloitte report, could create thousands of jobs and increase Australia’s gross domestic product by up to A$26-billion.”