Information and communications technology (ICT) services company Altron Systems Integration has moved into the implementation phase of the ICT infrastructure solution for the Impact Catalyst initiative, which will help improve the Internet connectivity of 109 rural schools in Limpopo, Mpumalanga and the Northern Cape. "The initial implementation phase will commence for [diversified mining multinational] Anglo American-supported schools during May and will run over a period of months, according to the project plan. "The solution will include the erection of high-sites, the installation of wireless access points and very-small-aperture terminals using satellites to enable connectivity," the company said on May 24. The initiative is aimed at providing an ICT infrastructure solution to enable schools to have access to the Internet. The schools identified for this project either do not currently have access to the Internet or have limited broadband access and, through the education programmes of Anglo American and coal and heavy minerals mining company Exxaro, the schools will be supported. “Internet connectivity is critical for modern education and school administration. Access to the Internet opens doorways to a wealth of information, knowledge and educational resources, increasing opportunities for learning in and beyond the classroom,” says Anglo American head of education Zaheera Soomar. “We understand the impact that this solution will have on the schools and their communities. We are committed to delivering a world-class service, one which these communities truly deserve to help join the future of the South African economy,” says Altron Systems Integration special projects executive Tim Ellis. “Education is the true equaliser in the new global economy, and enabling connectivity and access to the Internet for these schools will allow teachers and students to become part of the Fourth Industrial Revolution community.” As part of the project, the programme and its partners are looking into other workstreams, such as devices, training of local businesses that will be required to do maintenance and upkeep of the facilities and content management, Altron adds. “This programme will be an accelerator of improved Internet connectivity in schools in the rural areas and will improve inclusiveness in terms of quality education. Learning platforms that are part of this network will enable educators and children to have live access to learning material and resources,” Impact Catalyst CEO Charl Harding says.