Canadian mining company Ivanhoe Mines has pledged to achieve net-zero operational greenhouse-gas emissions (Scope 1 and 2) at the Kamoa-Kakula copper mine, in the Democratic Republic of Congo. "In support of the Paris Agreement on climate change, and in the spirit of the commitments at the recent virtual global climate conference by the Chinese and US governments to sharply cut emissions, Ivanhoe has committed to work with its joint venture partners and leading underground mining equipment manufacturers to ensure Kamoa-Kakula becomes the first net-zero operational carbon emitter among the world’s top-tier copper producers," the company said in a statement on May 5. As the mine and concentrator plant at the mine are already powered by clean, renewable hydropower, the focus of the company’s net-zero commitment will be on electrifying the project’s mining fleet with new, state-of-the-art equipment powered by electric batteries or hydrogen fuel cells. “Emissions from all gasoline and diesel vehicles not only harm our planet, they harm our health. Electric and fuel-cell vehicles now include cars, transit buses, trucks of all sizes, and even big-rig tractor trailers,” said Ivanhoe co-chairperson Robert Friedland. “Industrial-scale electric and fuel-cell mechanised underground mining equipment is being tested around the world and it is only a matter of time until they become available for commercial use in the size that we require for our large-scale, bulk mining operations. "We plan to be among the first of the early adopters of the technology,” he added. He further noted that Ivanhoe would eventually also seek to achieve net-zero total emissions, which includes Scope 3 emissions. “We have the opportunity to be an industry leader in the fight against climate change and we look forward to spearheading the drive for a future free of fossil fuels, initially at Kamoa-Kakula, but eventually at all of our mines. "Through collaboration and creativity, we can be a positive force in addressing our industry’s most pressing challenges, working together to find the right path forward," said Friedland. 