The merger of American Lithium and Plateau Energy Metals has been completed, creating an Americas-focused developer of energy metals at a time when securing a sustainable supply of critical minerals is a global priority. The merger combined two large lithium development projects – TLC, in Nevada, and Falchani, in Peru. “We are thrilled to complete this acquisition of Plateau, which significantly increases our portfolio of assets and expands our range of opportunities in the Americas. I would like to take this time to welcome our new colleagues from Plateau, who bring a highly complementary skill set. Not only is this important for the continued development of the Plateau assets, but also their success in producing battery grade lithium at Falchani will be directly relevant as we focus on that milestone at TLC,” said recently appointed American Lithium CEO Simon Clarke. Clarke succeeded founder Michael Kobler, who will remain with the company as GM of the US operations. Andrew Bowering will move from his current role as CFO and director to be chairperson of the company. Ben Binninger remains an independent director and Graham Ballachey remains as VP engineering. From the Plateau side, founder Laurence Stefan will join American Lithium as president, COO and director. Philip Gibbs will become the CFO and Ted O’Connor will join the board of directors and will also be technical adviser and qualified person for the company’s projects. Stefan has more than 30 years of experience in the mining industry, serving as MD in Peru since 2007. He worked at Gold Fields of South Africa and JCI, where he was involved in the beneficiation of a wide variety of solid metal/non-metal commodities. He has vast experience covering over 100 projects on 6 continents and led the discovery team for the Falchani lithium project. Gibbs has extensive experience with listed mining and mineral exploration companies operating in Africa and South America. He also serves as CFO of Cobalt BlockChain and Asante Gold. O’Connor. is a professional geoscientist with more than 30 years of experience in the exploration industry and has been involved with Macusani Yellowcake and Plateau since shortly after inception. Previously, as director of corporate development for Cameco, he was responsible for evaluating, directing and exploring for uranium deposits worldwide. American Lithium acquired all the issued and outstanding common shares of Plateau on the basis of 0.29 exchange units for each share of Plateau held.