PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Diversified miner Rio Tinto this week unveiled a preview of its final showcase of rare Argyle pink, red and blue diamonds from its iconic mine in the remote east Kimberley region of Western Australia. Mining at the Argyle mine stopped in November last year, after 37 years of operation. “I am delighted to launch this historic collection of extraordinary diamonds, a testament to the amazing Argyle orebody and the men and women who have worked so hard to bring these diamonds to market,” Rio CEO of its minerals division Sinead Kaufman said. Comprising 70 diamonds weighing 81.63 ct, the 2021 Argyle Pink Diamonds Tender has a record number of diamonds larger than one carat. The collection is headlined with Lot Number 1, Argyle Eclipse, a 3.47 ct diamond that is the largest fancy intense pink diamond ever offered at the tender. Titled The Journey Beyond, the 2021 Argyle Pink Diamonds Tender takes its reference from the 1.5-billion-year journey from creation to discovery and their remarkable impact on world diamond and jewellery history. The Tender collection comprises five ‘hero’ diamonds selected for their unique beauty and named to ensure there is a permanent record of their contribution to the history of the world’s most important diamonds, including the Argyle Eclipse, the Argyle Stella, a 1.79 ct square radiant shaped fancy vivid purplish pink diamond, the Argyle Lumiere, a 2.03 ct square radiant shaped fancy deep pink diamond, the Argyle Solaris, a 2.05 ct radiant shaped fancy intense pink diamond, and the Argyle Bohème, a 1.01 ct, radiant shaped fancy red diamond. Also offered alongside the 2021 annual Argyle Pink Diamonds Tender are 41 lots of carefully curated Argyle blue diamonds, weighing 24.88 ct in total. Titled Once in a Blue Moon, these are the very last blue and violet diamonds to emerge from the Argyle mine. The 2021 Argyle Pink Diamonds Tender will be showcased in Perth, Antwerp, Singapore and Sydney, subject to Covid-19 protocols. Bids close on September 1.