PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Oil and gas major Woodside is looking at solar energy for its Pluto liquefied natural gas (LNG) facility, on Western Australia’s Burrup Peninsula. The company told shareholders this week that it is investigating the supply of some 50 MW of solar energy from the proposed power project, which would comprise more than 210 000 solar panels, making it one of the largest in Western Australia. Acting CEO Meg O’Neill said that Western Australia is uniquely placed to capitalise on the state’s world-class renewable energy resources and the willingness of industry, government and other key stakeholders to cooperate on new energy opportunities. “Woodside’s vision is for large-scale supply of renewable energy to existing and future industry on the Burrup Peninsula. “We are lucky to have access to abundant natural resources, safe and reliable energy operations and both industry and government that are motivated to drive sustainable energy outcomes,” she said. The company has undertaken a range of environmental, geotechnical and engineering studies and is progressing key stakeholder consultations ahead of seeking regulatory approvals for the power project. Woodside and multinational group Perdaman will evaluate the supply of a further 50 MW of solar power from the Woodside power project to Perdaman’s proposed urea facility. Perdaman estimated that incorporating solar power could reduce its fuel gas consumption by some 50% while reducing emissions by at least 200 000 t/y of carbon dioxide equivalent over 20 years. The initiative would also allow Perdaman to increase production of ammonia, which produces zero emissions at the point of use. “Our work with Perdaman is another demonstration of the important role the gas industry can play in driving the energy transition and achieving net zero emissions by 2050,” O’Neill said. Perdaman chairperson Vikas Rambal said that the initiative was strategically in line with the company’s commitment to greenhouse gas management and carbon neutrality by 2050. “This exciting initiative with Woodside will further enhance the manufacturing of the blue ammonia for supply to the Asian market and help position Western Australia as a first mover in implementing renewable energy in a world-scale downstream industry.”