PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Queensland Resources Council (QRC) has welcomed the federal government’s intentions to invest A$190-million over the next five years as part of its growth plans for the region. Minsiter for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Keith Pitt, announced the major investment package which was aimed at further supporting new job creation, digital connectivlty and business growth. “Our plan will stimulate growth, private sector participation and business opportunities right across the north as the nation moves beyond economic recovery toward a secure and sustained economy,” Pitt said. “These investments will be made over the next five years to support the implementation of the 20 year White Paper on Developing Northern Australia that will see growth in jobs and the economies of the North. “The 2021-22 Budget measures and funding will maximise jobs and economic opportunities across the north and support the government’s JobMaker plan, Modern Manufacturing Strategy, the Gas Fired Recovery program and the Ag2030 agenda to boost Australia’s agricultural production.” New measures for Northern Australia include piloting of a Regions for Growth approcah, to help capitalise on regional strenghts, a Northern Australia Development plan, which will help businessses to scale up and diversify, and a Connecting Northern Australia initiative, which will improve digital connectivity. The Coalition Government is committed to building on the strengths of northern Australia to maximise the opportunities for jobs, economic development and the further expansion of business and industry across our north,” Pitt said. “Measures in the 2021-22 Budget will further help businesses scale up and diversify through the A$111.9 million Northern Australia Development program. The program will provide co-investment grants which will help businesses build capability and resilience. “The government is also investing A$68.5-million in telecommunications projects which will improve digital connectivity across the north, including remote indigenous communities. “Communications and digital connectivity is critical to our modern economy. Improved access in regional, rural and remote areas of the north will help people and business remain connected and benefit from the technology that is available to people in the major towns and cities.” Assistant Minister for Northern Australia Michelle Landry said the budget measures included a pilot Regions of Growth approach to help communities to identify and capitalise on their strengths. “The Regions of Growth pilot program will provide specialists to help connect business to economic opportunities in areas such as advanced manufacturing, critical minerals development, or in agriculture,” Assistant Minister Landry said. “The Regions of Growth to be piloted in the first stage are Mount Isa to Townsville; Cairns to Gladstone; Beetaloo Basin to Darwin Port; and Broome to Kununurra to Darwin. This program invests A$9.3-million over five years and will provide locally-based support for business development and opportunities in the north. “The next phase of development will set the new, strategic direction for northern Australia, ensuring it reaches its true potential as a great place in which to live, work and invest.” These measures enhance the whole-of-government approach to economic growth in the north, and build on the A$49.7 million already provided to support reforms to the A$5-billion Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility (NAIF) and an extension of its investment window to June 2026. Pitt said the announcement comes on top of measures the government has already announced to support northern Australia. “We’ve already committed A$2.8 billion of the A$5 billion NAIF and around A$2-billion has been allocated to improve roads across the north’s regional and remote areas,” Pitt said. “No other government has shown such strong commitment to the north and the people who live there.” QRC CEO Ian Macfarlane said North Queensland, and in particular the North West region centred on Mount Isa, would be a focus area for growth in Queensland.  “North Queensland is home to the North West Minerals Province, which has great prospects in a number of critical and new economy minerals such as vanadium, cobalt, tungsten and scandium.  “The QRC will make the case for the Townsville to Mount Isa region to be included as one of the areas in the pilot Regions of Growth approach that Minister Pitt has announced today.”  The North West region has an estimated half a trillion dollars in new economy minerals which are needed for renewable energy infrastructure and technologies, which represents a multi-generation growth opportunity for Queensland, Macfarlane added.  “Given the economic significance of North Queensland, it is important governments do the hard yards for planning that will attract the most investment and return the best value to Queenslanders.  “The Australian government’s proactive approach to identify regions of growth, along with the state government’s Queensland Resources Industry Development Plan, can work in tandem to deliver targeted and valuable investments that provide the infrastructure and impetus to unlock the North and deliver for local communities.”