PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The South Australian government is calling for expressions of interest (EoI) to develop land at one of the region’s most prospective hydrogen export hubs, Port Bonython.

Treasurer Rob Lucas said EoIs will be rated on their ability to develop projects that have the potential to create economic growth and regional development on the Eyre Peninsula, as well South Australia more broadly, and contribute to Port Bonython as a multi-user, export-focused precinct to leverage the state’s advantages in renewable energy, fuels and minerals. 

“This is a significant piece of land that, when properly developed, has the potential to create significant economic and jobs growth not only for the Upper Spencer Gulf, but for the whole of South Australia,” said Lucas. 

Port Bonython was identified as an export hub for both green and blue hydrogen during the development of South Australia’s Hydrogen Export Modelling Tool. The tool was released in October last year and is being used by companies around the world to model the cost of producing and exporting hydrogen from South Australia.  

The nearby town of Whyalla boasts a highly skilled workforce, the Whyalla steelworks, a container port, strong national electricity grid connection as well as modern rail and road infrastructure. 

The state-owned site has access to multiple renewable energy zones and boasts over 2 000 ha of available land as well as access to an existing deepwater port comprising a 2.4 km long jetty, which has been approved for a A$37-million state government-funded upgrade. 

Through the National Hydrogen Strategy, which indicates a national hydrogen industry could generate about A$11-billion a year in gross domestic product by 2050, Australia has deepened established networks of international trade relationships and partnerships for clean energy. 

“South Australia’s Hydrogen Action Plan, regulatory frameworks, support for demonstration projects, international relationships and informational resources for investors clearly demonstrate our commitment to establishing international hydrogen supply chains,” said Lucas. 

“Having a hydrogen hub exporting to Australian and international markets will leverage the A$20-billion pipeline of large-scale renewable energy projects under development in South Australia. 

“Our state is a great place in which to do business and we are committed to becoming a national and international exporter of clean power while obtaining our goals of 100% renewables and 50% reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions by 2030. 

“Our expectation is that during the 2030s we will generate more clean power than is required for local use, setting us up to become a national and global force in clean energy export.” Lucas said the government would be looking for projects which complement and strategically align with existing and future land uses in the Port Bonython precinct. 

The site is currently home to oil and gas major Santos’ processing plant, which receives natural gas liquids and crude oil piped 659 km from the Moomba plant for export, and a diesel fuel import and storage terminal.